                                                                 
                                                                 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-30500 20-MAR-2012 
08:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
ORLANDO PECPEC, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-30500
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 30500; CR. NO. 09-1-2378)
 
MARCH 20, 2012
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND MCKENNA, JJ.;
WITH ACOBA, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM DUFFY, J., JOINS
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
Orlando Pecpec was charged in the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit with 25 counts of Violation of an Order for
 
Protection in relation to 25 voicemails and text messages he
 allegedly sent to the complaining witness, his former spouse. 
At
 
trial, the first 6 counts were supported only by the testimony of
 the complaining witness. The jury found Pecpec not guilty on
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
these counts. The remaining 19 counts were supported by 19
 
exhibits containing either audio recordings of the alleged
 voicemails or photographs of the alleged text messages. The jury
 found Pecpec guilty on each of these 19 counts, and the family
 court sentenced Pecpec to a one-year jail term on each count, to
 run concurrently, with the exception of Count 13 for which the
 sentence was to run consecutive to the remaining counts.
1 The
 
Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed. State v. Pecpec, No.
 
30500, 2011 WL 2037679 (Haw. App. May 25, 2011).
 
Pecpec challenges his convictions on Counts 8-15, which
 
refer to 8 voicemails on November 6, 2009; Counts 18-22, which
 refer to five text messages on November 6, 2009; and Counts 23­25, which refer to three text messages on November 7, 2009. 
Pecpec argues that these convictions were obtained in violation
 of his right to a unanimous verdict because the jury was not
 specifically instructed that it was required to unanimously agree
 to the specific act that supported each count. 
Although the jury instructions identified each count by
 
the date on which the alleged violation occurred and identified
 whether the violation was made by way of a voicemail or text
 message, they did not identify the time of the violation or the
 exhibit to which each count corresponded. Pecpec argues that,
 because the jury was not informed which count corresponded with
 which specific incident, the family court was required to provide
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided. 
-2­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the jurors with a specific unanimity instruction. Absent such an
 
instruction, Pecpec argues, the jurors may not have unanimously
 agreed that Pecpec committed the conduct described in each of the
 19 counts. Pecpec also argues that his consecutive sentence on
 Count 13 violates his constitutional rights to due process, equal
 protection, and to be free from cruel and unusual punishment
 because it may have been based on a verdict that was not
 unanimous. 
We hold that, under State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai
'i 339, 
355, 219 P.3d 1126, 1142 (2009), the family court was required to give a specific unanimity instruction in the circumstances of the instant case. However, we hold that the family court’s error did not contribute to Pecpec’s convictions, because there is no “genuine possibility” that the jurors could have found Pecpec guilty without unanimously concluding that he committed each of the acts presented in the State’s exhibits. Cf. id. at 354-55, 
219 P.3d at 1141-42. The jury was presented with 19 exhibits, and convicted Pecpec on 19 counts that corresponded to the dates on which the conduct in those exhibits allegedly occurred. The presentation of the evidence, jury instructions, and arguments of both counsel made clear that there was a one-to-one relationship between counts and exhibits. Thus, there is no reasonable possibility that Pecpec was convicted on less than a unanimous verdict. Accordingly, the family court’s error in failing to provide a specific unanimity instruction was harmless. 
-3­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
However, we hold that the family court abused its
 
discretion in sentencing Pecpec to a consecutive sentence on
 
Count 13. The family court sentenced Pecpec to a consecutive
 sentence based on the conduct set forth in Exhibit 17. However,
 the record does not support an inference that the jury found
 Pecpec guilty on Count 13 based specifically on the conduct
 memorialized in Exhibit 17, and thus the sentence was improper.
 
Accordingly, we vacate Pecpec’s sentence on Count 13
 
and remand for re-sentencing. We affirm the family court’s
 June 4, 2010 Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence in all
 other respects.
 
I. Background
 
On April 15, 2010, the State charged Pecpec by way of
 
complaint with 25 counts of Violation of an Order for Protection,
 in violation of Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 586-11(a)(1)(A).2 The language of each count was identical,
 
2 HRS § 586-11(a) (Supp. 2009) provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) Whenever an order for protection is granted
pursuant to this chapter, a respondent or person to be
restrained who knowingly or intentionally violates the
order for protection is guilty of a misdemeanor. A
 person convicted under this subsection shall undergo
domestic violence intervention at any available
domestic violence program as ordered by the court. The
court additionally shall sentence a person convicted
under this subsection as follows:
 
(1) For a first conviction for violation of the
order for protection:
(A) That is in the nature of non-domestic
abuse, the person may be sentenced to a jail sentence
of forty-eight hours and be fined not more than $150;
provided that the court shall not sentence a defendant
to pay a fine unless the defendant is or will be able
to pay the fine[.]
 
-4­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
except for the date of the alleged violation:
 
On or about [date], in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawaii, [Pecpec] did intentionally
or knowingly violate the Order of Protection issued inFC-DA No. 08-1-1887, filed on the 15th day ofSeptember, 2008, by the Honorable Linda S. Martell,Judge of the [family court], State of Hawai' i,
pursuant to Chapter 586 of the [HRS], therebycommitting the offense of Violation of an Order forProtection in violation of Section 586-5.5
[3] and 
Section 586-11(a)(1)(A) of the [HRS]. 
Counts 1 through 6 alleged violations on October 19,
 
2009. Count 7 alleged a violation on October 22, 2009. Counts 8
 
through 15 and 18 through 22 alleged violations on November 6,
 2009. Counts 16 and 22 through 25 alleged violations on
 November 7, 2009. Finally, Count 17 alleged a violation on
 November 8, 2009.
4
 
A. Trial 
The complaining witness (“CW”) testified that she and
 
Pecpec were married from 1997 to 2007 and had five children
 together. CW testified that, on September 15, 2008, she obtained
 an Order for Protection against Pecpec, which was effective until
 
3 HRS § 586-5.5(a) (Supp. 2001) provides, in relevant part: 
If, after hearing all relevant evidence, the
court finds that the respondent has failed to show
cause why the order should not be continued and that a
protective order is necessary to prevent domestic
abuse or a recurrence of abuse, the court may order
that a protective order be issued for a further fixed
reasonable period as the court deems appropriate.
 
4
 Although nothing in the language of each count distinguished the
counts involving the same date from one another, the caption of the complaint
correlated each count with a different police report number. The
 corresponding police reports, which are contained in the record on appeal,
state the date and time of each alleged violation and specify whether each
violation occurred by way of voicemail or text message. However, it does not
appear that this correlation between the police reports and the charged counts
was presented to the jury, and the police reports were not admitted into
evidence.
 
-5­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
September 2013. A redacted copy of the September 15, 2008 Order
 
for Protection was admitted into evidence.5 The Order prohibited
 
Pecpec from, inter alia, contacting CW by phone or text message,
 but allowed for “LIMITED contact . . . for the purpose of”
 “attending courtroom proceedings” and “service of legal documents
 
by mail or through a process server.”
 
CW testified that Pecpec left her six voicemails on her
 
office telephone on October 19, 2009. CW could not remember the
 
exact times of the voicemails, but stated that they were left
 “from 10:00 in the morning, on” “during business hours.” CW
 could not remember the exact content of the voicemails but
 testified that the voicemails discussed “various, different
 things[,]” such as speculating that she was not answering her
 work phone because she had been out late and that their oldest
 son “really wasn’t his and that’s probably why his son wanted to
 change his last name.” CW recorded the voicemails but did not
 provide the recordings to the prosecutor because she “wrote down
 whatever was said on the message.” 
CW testified that she also received voicemails from
 
Pecpec on October 22, November 6, November 7 and November 8,
 2009. CW saved these voicemails, recorded them, and gave the
 
recordings to the prosecutor’s office. Redacted versions of the
 
recordings were admitted into evidence over defense counsel’s
 
5
 The redactions removed, inter alia, language referencing domestic
abuse by Pecpec against CW. 
-6­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
objection as State’s Exhibits 13 through 23. CW testified that
 
Exhibit 23 contained a voicemail she received on October 22,
 2009. CW testified that Exhibits 15 through 22 contained
 voicemails she received on November 6, 2009 as follows: Exhibit
 15 was received after 1:00 p.m.; Exhibit 16 was received at 1:25
 p.m.; Exhibit 17 was received at 1:28 p.m.; Exhibit 18 was
 received at 1:46 p.m.; Exhibit 19 was received at 1:50 p.m.;
 Exhibit 20 was received at 1:51 p.m.; Exhibit 21 was received at
 2:05 p.m.; and Exhibit 22 was received at 3:40 p.m. CW testified
 that Exhibit 14 contained a voicemail she received on November 7,
 2009 at “about” 2:15 p.m. Exhibit 13 contained a voicemail she
 received on November 8, 2009 at “about 5:00 p.m.” 
The recordings were published to the jury and
 
6
transcribed as follows :
[Exhibit 23, October 22, 2009:] (Indiscernible).
But you know, [CW], that’s what you gotta
(indiscernible), okay. (Indiscernible) fucking have
any love for me or whatsoever in front of the kids,
because you never did. When I think of the -- fucking
our past (indiscernible), when I think about fucking
when you gave me a special gift, you probably wouldn’t
even remember what you gave me; but I still do
(indiscernible).
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 22, November 6, 2009:] What? You not
 
going to answer the phone now? Huh? Don’t worry, I
said. The (indiscernible) is getting clearer and
clearer and clearer. That’s why you spend so much
time at Ko Olina with your time-shares with
(indiscernible) of people. That’s why you spend so
much time at Ala Moana Hotel with the bunch of people
that you fucking working with, okay. 
6
 The State introduced each voicemail by stating the exhibit number
and the alleged date of the voicemail. The exhibit number and the date
 provided by the State appear in brackets in the passage quoted above.
Based on CW’s testimony regarding the exhibit numbers, supra, it
appears the voicemails for November 6, 2009 were not published to the jury in
the order in which they were allegedly received. 
-7­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Oh, if I were you, I would have your friend
cancel the fucking reservation November 17th, that
whole week, (indiscernible).
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 21, November 6, 2009:] You know, I
don’t know if you remember about when you had asked me
about how I wen’ ask about your job.
So what do you think about your new job?
 . . . .
 
[Exhibit 20, November 6, 2009:] July 26, July
28, (indiscernible) July 24, or July 23rd.
(Indiscernible) fuck you.
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 19, November 6, 2009:] You know, bottom
line for me (indiscernible), yeah, just because I call
you up, it doesn’t necessarily mean I wen’ smoke,
okay. I remember this, now. I keep telling you guys
that when (indiscernible) did something to
(indiscernible) and his wife, he wasn’t high. I keep
telling you (indiscernible), the sisters, and it was
(indiscernible), okay. (Indiscernible). That’s why
to me (indiscernible).
You already know what she did in the past about
this relationship, so -- everybody can see that
already, everybody except the fucking guys that, you
know, kiss ass for the pussy. Because why? The
 fuckers no (indiscernible).
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 18, November 6, 2009:] (Indiscernible),
fucking (indiscernible), okay. (Indiscernible) make
me go to the Hawaiian National Bank? Because that’s
 where (indiscernible). (Indiscernible.)
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 17, November 6, 2009:] (Indiscernible).
(Indiscernible) fucking (indiscernible).
(Indiscernible) because all those fuckers are sorry
asses, too, okay. But they cannot afford to get
divorced from their wife because the wife will take
 everything, okay.
(Indiscernible) going on, [CW]. I told you, when
you sent me to jail, you only made me stronger.
Stronger by what? Meeting the people that I needed to
meet, okay. That’s why, I go in again, and if I stay
in two years, more fucking strong I come, okay. On
 the outside I’m already solid. Inside, I even more
solid, okay. (Indiscernible) the kind of thing that’s
comes to -- to me. (Indiscernible) I hope you
understand that, okay.
Now, the police help you out. Why? Because
 
(indiscernible) helping you. (Indiscernible) helping
you because why (indiscernible), okay, in Alewa
Heights, all those things, okay, and all those people
have contact. But you know what? Like I said,
sometimes (indiscernible) really help because there’s
a price to pay for all those kids. (Indiscernible).
Why? They have no fucking (indiscernible).
 
. . . .
 
-8­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Exhibit 16, November 6, 2009:] Like I said,
[CW], I’m not (indiscernible) to kill you. I’m not
 
doing nothing wrong to you. I brought up
(indiscernible) name. (Indiscernible) ways to hurt
 you. No, no, no, no. (Indiscernible) saying that,
okay. But all I’m saying is, that, just because I
talk the way I talk doesn’t mean I did what you
accusing me of for the fucking past six, seven years,
okay. But maybe it was you that was smoking; that’s
why you had to make yourself feel good, okay. But
 like I said, [CW], you will continue to deny me. Why?
Because you cannot remember all the lies you have said
to me. (Indiscernible).
Oh, this is what I wanted to say: Like the
pharmaceutical company, with the insurance, with
(indiscernible), and with your doctors and you as a
patient, it is the way they work around. And that’s
 why these people all hang out and drink together.
Now, the bank, construction workers, homeowners, the
subcontractors and everything, that’s why they all
party together. Why? Because that’s the way they
going get their money. Or else there wouldn’t be any
(indiscernible) for anybody. You see? That’s why you
been doing (indiscernible). (Indiscernible)
government’s money, just to fucking (indiscernible)
and they find themself in the bedroom fucking, making
people’s life miserable.
Like I said, (indiscernible). I’m just showing
her family and Randall, too -- because Randall’s a
(indiscernible), too, okay. I hope you see that.
(Indiscernible). And if they get girlfriend, I say,
Sorry, but you cannot come around; I’m not going to
destroy your relationship with your other -- your
girlfriend. I don’t want to be part of that. My
friends already wen’ use me to do -- destroy mine,
okay. I’m not that kind of person (indiscernible).
If you want destroy your relationship with your
girlfriend, you do it on your own. Don’t do
(indiscernible) on my time.
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 15, November 6, 2009:] (Indiscernible).
Remember you said that you wanted to purchase? Yeah? 
(Indiscernible) [CW], because of you, using my money,
okay. Since when you (indiscernible) concerned?
You’re (indiscernible) gone for two days, okay. Go
hide in Ala Moana Hotel. Go hide in the apartment
(indiscernible). (Indiscernible) you’re a sick
person, I told you.
I’m going to let you know, I’m going to do one
other -- I’m going to contest the TRO again, okay.
I’m also going to contest the Divorce Decree again,
okay. And this time I’m going to let the kids talk in
court. Those are the kids (indiscernible) subpoenaed.
I’m going to subpoena everybody that knows what’s
going on already, okay. I’m also going to bring out
about the bank statements and our deposits and all
those things. (Indiscernible) judge wen’ ask about
what I do, what I did, okay. I didn’t want to talk
 
-9­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
about it because it involves you; but you’re forcing
me to do it, okay. (Indiscernible). (Indiscernible)
aren’t going to help you, okay. At least
 (indiscernible) support, [CW]. This is something that
you always talked about to me. Now that I have it,
you don’t want it? Why? Why? Because you fucked up.
Fuck that, you know. Fuck it. If this is the way
you’re going to raise the kids, don’t involve me with
them, okay. Why don’t you go find a father that you
(indiscernible) with them.
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 14, November 7, 2009:] I’m sorry to say
this, but you turned off your fucking phone on me, on
nobody else, yeah. (Indiscernible), okay.
 
. . . .
 
[Exhibit 13, November 8, 2009:] (Indiscernible)?
(Indiscernible), yeah, when you were fucking
(indiscernible). (Indiscernible).
 
(Internal quotation marks omitted).
 
CW testified that she also received text messages from
 
Pecpec on November 6 and November 7, 2009.  CW saved these
 
messages and forwarded them to another cell phone with a larger
 
screen, and then took digital photographs of the messages and
 gave the photographs to the prosecutor’s office. The photographs
 were admitted into evidence over defense counsel’s objection as
 State’s Exhibits 5 through 12. CW testified that Exhibits 5
 through 9 contained text messages she received on November 6,
 2009 as follows: Exhibit 5 was received at approximately 9:40
 p.m.; Exhibit 6 was received at 9:53 p.m.; Exhibit 7 was received
 at 10:21 p.m.; Exhibit 8 was received at 10:33 p.m.; and Exhibit
 and 9 was received at 10:47 p.m. CW testified that Exhibits 10
 through 12 contained text messages she received on November 7,
 2009 as follows: Exhibit 10 was received at 3:36 a.m.; Exhibit 11
 was received at 3:47 a.m.; and Exhibit 12 was received at 5:42
 
-10­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
a.m. 
The photographs of the text messages were published to
 
7
the jury. The text messages read as follows : 
[Exhibit 5, November 6, 2009] FWD: No need look
 
for me i got u on G P S i also
[Exhibit 6, November 6, 2009] FWD: Must be nice
 
to see men or lesbians jump to help u with ur problem
using the pussy i ate n fuck. Hard to replace me in
the way i ate n fuck u
[Exhibit 7, November 6, 2009] FWD: How’s the
 
Shack n the small men mentality cops. I hope the balls
they have can give me a challenge just ask Maribel if
i’m scared
 
[Exhibit 8, November 6, 2009] FWD: I been doing
my homework. The guy’s u have can’t protect themselves
bcuz i know who they r. N cars they drive n license
plate how’s that. I’m fm. 94 block
 
[Exhibit 9, November 6, 2009] FWD: U can alway’s
at the bus stop, running, or riding a bike, or riding
in a car tinted next to u. Watching u give head that’s
nuts.
 
[Exhibit 10, November 7, 2009] FWD: Same
 
scenerio every week not home to care for the kids yet
she forces them to go home so she can get eaten n fuck
all night. That’s y u did I U D n not get preg
[Exhibit 11, November 7, 2009] FWD: So silly u
think u can handle me but cannot handle me fucking u.
3 am not home doesn’t look good to C P S
[Exhibit 12, November 7, 2009] FWD: I told u i
 
hope u r not helping to destroy a family by staying
out all night with ur friends bcuz some is not good in
breaking up
 
CW testified that she did not give Pecpec permission to
 
contact her by phone or text message on any of the alleged dates. 
CW testified that the voicemails she received from Pecpec on
 October 19 and 22, 2009 made her feel “[n]ervous.” In response
 to these calls, CW called Pecpec because she was concerned that
 the voicemails indicated Pecpec knew her whereabouts. CW
 
7
 The prosecution marked each exhibit with the date CW allegedly
received the text message. That date appears in brackets in the passage
quoted above.
 
-11­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testified that the conversations mostly involved Pecpec “accusing
 
[her] of something,” and that she “would just listen sometimes
 
and try to be calm if he sounded agitated.” CW testified that
 
she told Pecpec to stop calling her “because this is a
 
violation.” She testified that she contacted Pecpec “because
 [she] was scared and [] wanted to say, you know, What is it that
 you want?” 
CW testified that the voicemails and text messages she
 
received from Pecpec on November 6, November 7, and November 8,
 
2009 made her feel “[n]ervous and scared.” CW again contacted
 
Pecpec during this time frame because “some of the texts entailed
 
GPS” or other indications that Pecpec knew her whereabouts. CW
 testified that she contacted Pecpec to “have him stop calling
 [her]” and to “get an idea of where he was.” 
On cross-examination, CW testified that Pecpec filed a
 
motion to dissolve the Order for Protection on May 29, 2009, and
 that a hearing on the motion was scheduled for October 19, 2009
 at 8:30 a.m. Pecpec did not appear at the hearing. CW could not
 recall whether Pecpec called her on October 19, 2009 to ask about
 the hearing, but stated that she would not have included those
 phone calls in her complaint because “it could have just been
 regarding the court.” 
Defense counsel asked CW regarding the content of the
 
voicemails she received on October 19, 2009 that were the subject
 
-12­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of her complaint. CW stated that she wrote the content of the
 
voicemails on the statement she made to the police. However,
 upon being shown her statement, CW testified that she did not
 
write the content of the voicemails on her statement. 
CW also testified that, around November 6, 2009, she
 
had a conversation with one of her sons (“AP”) in which she
 
threatened to call the police because Pecpec was with the
 children even though he was prohibited from having contact with
 them. On redirect, CW testified that she did not report this
 incident to the police because she “didn’t want the kids to see
 their dad getting arrested, and they came home[.]” 
AP, who is Pecpec and CW’s son, testified as a witness
 
for the defense. AP testified that, on November 6, 2009, he was
 at his grandparents’ house when CW called. CW found out that
 Pecpec was also at the house. Pecpec then left the house, but CW
 thought Pecpec was still there and told AP to come home. AP told
 CW that he did not want to go home, and CW told AP that she would
 call the police if he did not come home. AP testified that he
 wanted to stay at his grandparents’ house because he wanted to
 see his dad. AP did not leave his grandparents’ house and
 instead stayed there for several hours. Pecpec eventually
 returned and talked with CW on the phone. 
Pecpec testified in his own defense. With regard to
 
October 19, 2009, Pecpec testified that he was late for the
 
-13­  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
hearing on his motion to dissolve the Order for Protection and
 
therefore missed the hearing. Pecpec stated that he called CW
 later on October 19, 2009 to discuss the hearing and to explain
 that he had missed the hearing because he was suffering from a
 kidney stone the previous night. Pecpec testified that the call
 lasted approximately 10 to 15 minutes and was solely concerned
 with the hearing. After that call, he received a call from CW
 but could not answer it because he was on the phone with someone
 else. He then left CW three voicemails on October 19, 2009 at
 10:14 a.m., 10:24 a.m., and 10:26 a.m., because she had asked him
 to call her back. All three of the voicemails concerned the
 court hearing. Pecpec testified that CW called him back after
 these voicemails. Pecpec denied calling CW on October 19, 2009
 
at 12:08 p.m. or 12:20 p.m. and stated that he was on the bus at
 
that time.
8 Pecpec also denied calling CW on October 22, 2009.
 
Pecpec testified regarding an incident at his parents’
 
house on November 6, 2009. Pecpec’s children came to the house
 
and, after he said “hi” to them, he left. He then received a
 call from his son, AP, who was crying. AP told Pecpec that CW
 was going to call the police if the children didn’t go home. At
 approximately 1:00 p.m., while still on the phone with AP, Pecpec
 
8
 As noted, CW did not testify to the exact times of the voicemails
she received on October 19, 2009. See supra, p.6. However, the times Pecpec
referred to in his testimony correspond with the times listed in the police
reports concerning the October 19, 2009 violations. See supra, n.4. 
-14­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
received a call from CW, who asked him to tell the children to go
 
home. Pecpec testified that he then went “back and forth”
 between calls from CW and AP until he got back to the house. 
After arriving at the house, CW “kept calling, leaving []
 messages to call her back.” 
With regard to the November 6, 2009 voicemails, Pecpec
 
testified that he “might have” left CW a voicemail at 1:16 p.m.,
 asking her to “[h]ang on” because he was busy. When asked about
 the voicemail contained in Exhibit 22, which defense counsel
 identified as allegedly being left on November 6, 2009 at 1:16
 p.m., Pecpec testified that he did not leave that voicemail on
 November 6, 2009, but “maybe a different time.”
9 Pecpec
 
testified that he called CW at 1:25 p.m. to ask her to let the
 children stay at his parents’ house, but she refused. When asked
 about the voicemail contained in Exhibit 21, which defense
 counsel identified as allegedly being left on November 6, 2009 at
 1:25 p.m., Pecpec testified that the voicemail contained in
 Exhibit 21 “never happened[.]” Pecpec also testified that the
 voicemails contained in Exhibits 19, 18, 17, 16 and 15 were not
 
9
 During Pecpec’s testimony, defense counsel appeared to identify
the conduct described in Exhibit 22 as relating to 1:16 p.m.; Exhibit 21 as
relating to 1:25 p.m.; Exhibit 19 as relating to 1:46 p.m.; Exhibit 18 as
relating to 1:50 p.m.; Exhibit 17 as relating to 1:51 p.m.; Exhibit 16 as
relating to 2:05 p.m.; and Exhibit 15 as relating to 3:40 p.m. However, this
is inconsistent with CW’s testimony regarding the timing of the voicemails.
 
-15­  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
made on November 6, 2009.10
 
Pecpec talked with CW at approximately 9:30 p.m. on
 
November 6, 2009 after his children returned home. Pecpec
 
testified that CW stated, “You know what? Fuck you. More better
 I look for you myself and shoot you, you fucker.” 
Pecpec testified that he did not call CW on November 7,
 
2009 at 2:15 p.m., and did not have a recollection of the
 voicemail contained in Exhibit 14. Pecpec testified that he did
 not call CW on November 8, 2009 at 5:15 p.m., and that the
 voicemail contained in Exhibit 13 was made at a previous time. 
Pecpec also testified that he did not leave the voicemail
 contained in Exhibit 23 on October 22, 2009, but rather at a
 previous time. Pecpec did not state when these voicemails were
 left, but did not testify that he left these voicemails prior to
 the September 15, 2008 effective date for the Order for
 Protection. 
With regard to the text messages on November 6, 2009,
 
Pecpec testified that he remembered writing the message CW
 allegedly received at 9:40 p.m., but did not remember sending it. 
The message was written in response to CW’s threatening Pecpec
 over the phone. CW responded to the text message by writing,
 “Fuck you.” Pecpec also remembered writing the message CW
 
10
 Defense counsel did not question Pecpec regarding the voicemail
contained in Exhibit 20. 
-16­ 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
allegedly received at 9:53 p.m., but did not remember sending it. 
Pecpec testified that he did not send CW text messages on
 November 6, 2009 at 10:21 p.m., 10:33 p.m., or 10:47 p.m., and
 that the text messages contained in Exhibits 7 through 9 were
 
made at a different time. 
With regard to the text messages on November 7, 2009,
 
Pecpec testified that the text message contained in Exhibit 10
 
was not made on November 7, 2009, but was made the following
 week. Pecpec also testified that the text messages contained in
 Exhibits 11 and 12 were not made on November 7, 2009. 
On cross-examination, Pecpec testified that he received
 
the Order for Protection and knew that he was prohibited from
 contacting or threatening CW. Pecpec confirmed that he left CW
 the voicemails that had been played for the jury. 
CW was called as a rebuttal witness for the State. 
Regarding the incident involving AP, CW testified that she did
 not tell Pecpec, “More better I look for you myself and shoot you
 myself[.]” 
During the settling of jury instructions, neither
 
Pecpec nor the State requested a specific unanimity
 
instruction.
11 The family court instructed the jury that “[a]
 
11
 Hawai'i Pattern Jury Instructions--Criminal (HAWJIC) provides the
following “generic” unanimity instruction: 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for
 
(continued...)
 
-17­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
verdict must represent the considered judgment of each juror, and
 
in order to return a verdict, it is necessary that each juror
 agree thereto. In other words, your verdict must be unanimous.” 
(Emphasis added). The family court also instructed the jury with
 regard to the elements of the offense. With regard to Counts 1
 through 17, the family court instructed the jury 17 separate
 times, as follows, changing only the count number and the date:
 
As to Count [count number] of the Complaint,
[Pecpec] is charged with the offense of Violation of
An Order for Protection.
 
A person commits the offense of Violation of An
Order for Protection if he intentionally or knowingly
engages in conduct which is prohibited by an Order for
Protection issued by a Judge of the Family Court that
was then in effect. There are four material elements
 of the offense of Violation of An Order for
 Protection, each of which the prosecution must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt.
These four elements are:
 1. That on or about [date] in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i an Order for 
Protection issued by a Judge of the Family Courtpursuant to [c]hapter 586 of the [HRS], was in effect,prohibiting [Pecpec] from engaging in certain conduct,namely contacting or threatening [CW], by eithertelephone or recorded message; and
2. That on or about [date], in the City and
 
11(...continued)
the purpose of showing that there is more than one
[act][omission][item] upon which proof of an element
of an offense may be based. 
In order for the
 
prosecution to prove an element, all twelve jurors
must unanimously agree that [the same act][the same
omission][possession of the same item] has been proved
beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
HAWJIC Instruction 8.02 (brackets in original).
Although the HAWJIC refers to this instruction as a “generic”
unanimity instruction, this type of instruction is referred to as a “specific”unanimity instruction in our caselaw. See, e.g., State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 
1, 33, 928 P.2d 843, 875 (1996) (identifying a “specific” unanimityinstruction as one that “advises the jury that all twelve of its members mustagree that the same underlying criminal conduct has been proved beyond areasonable doubt”). 
-18­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, [Pecpec]
intentionally or knowingly engaged in certain conduct,
namely contacting or threatening [CW] by eithertelephone or recorded message, which was conductprohibited by the Order for Protection; and
3. That [Pecpec] knew, at the time, that such
conduct was prohibited by the Order for Protection;
and
 
4. That [Pecpec] was given notice of the Order
for Protection prior to engaging in such conduct by
having been personally served with the Order for
Protection.
 
The prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that [Pecpec] acted intentionally or knowingly
as to each element of the offense.
 
With regard to Counts 18 through 25, the family court
 
provided the same instruction as for the previous counts, but
 
replaced the phrase “by either telephone or recorded message”
 with the phrase “by text message.” The family court repeated
 this instruction 8 separate times, changing the count number and
 date. 
In instructing the jury regarding the form of its
 
verdict, the family court repeated the following instruction 25
 times, changing the count number with each repetition:
 
In Count [count number] of the Complaint, as to
Defendant ORLANDO PECPEC, you may bring in either one
of the following verdicts:
1. Not guilty; or
2. Guilty as charged of Violation of An Order
for Protection. 
Your verdict must be unanimous. 
(Emphasis added).
 
In closing argument, the State argued that CW’s
 
testimony was more credible than that of Pecpec regarding the
 
dates and times of the alleged voicemails and text messages. The
 State also connected the charged counts to the dates and exhibits
 
-19­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
as follows:
 
Now, you have before you 25 counts and numerous
dates of incidents. Let’s go over it quickly to try
to break it down and make it a little easier. 
Okay. So we’re talking about 25 counts of
Violation of an Order for Protection. We know that
 they fall into two categories -- voice mails and text
 messages. The voice mails would be your first 17
counts, Counts [1] to [17]. The text messages would
be your next eight counts, Counts [18] to [25].
Now, let’s look first at the voice mails. The
 
voice mails are grouped in terms of the dates of
incident. Counts [1] through [6] are from October 19,
2009; Count [7] is from October 22; Counts [8] to [15]
are November 6; Count [16] from November 7; and Count
[17] is from November 8.
Now, you listened to voice mails. These voice
 
mails are also associated with these dates. Exhibit
 23 is the voice mail from October 22; Exhibit[s] 15 to
22 are from November 6; Exhibit 14 is from November 7;
Exhibit 13 is from November 8.
 
Switching now to the text messages. Counts [18]
to [25], they are also grouped in terms of the dates
of incident. Counts [18] to [22] are from November 6;
Counts [23] to [25] are from November 7. For each of
 these text messages there are exhibits. Exhibits 5
 through 9 are the text messages from November 6; and
Exhibits 10 to 12 are the text messages from November
7.
 
Defense counsel argued that the voicemails on
 
October 19, 2009 concerned the hearing to dissolve the Order for
 
Protection. Defense counsel also argued that CW was not
 credible, and that CW continued to contact Pecpec between
 November 6 and November 8, 2009. Defense counsel also pointed
 out that CW did not include the date and time stamp on her
 recordings of the voicemails, and that Pecpec testified that the
 voicemails were from another time. 
In rebuttal closing, the State argued:
 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Order for Protection
prohibits him, prohibits [Pecpec] from contacting
[CW], threatening her. State has shown beyond a
reasonable doubt that he did just that 25 times.
 
-20­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Emphasis added).
 
The jury found Pecpec not guilty on Counts 1 through 6,
 
i.e., the voicemails on October 19, 2009. The jury found Pecpec
 
guilty on the remaining 19 counts. 
At sentencing, the State recommended that Pecpec be
 
sentenced to a one-year term of incarceration on each count, with
 
four of the sentences to run concurrently. The State did not
 
identify any specific counts for which concurrent sentencing
 
should be imposed, but stated that it was “looking at a sentence
 of five years total[.]” Defense counsel requested only that
 Pecpec be given credit for time served. The family court then
 inquired regarding the count to which Exhibit 17 related:
 
THE COURT: Okay. Counsel[ for the State],
Exhibit 17, November 6, 2009, turning your attention
to the transcripts, is that Count [10]?
[STATE]: Exhibit 17 is Count [13].
THE COURT: Exhibit 17 is -- is Count [13]?
[STATE]: Yes, your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay. Do you agree, counsel for
Defense?
 
[DEFENSE]: I’m sorry. I didn’t bring my
complete file.
THE COURT: Okay. No problem.
Do you wish to have your client address the
[c]ourt at this point?
 
Pecpec allocuted, and the family court subsequently
 
reviewed Pecpec’s history of violence against CW, his history of
 
drug use, his past convictions for harassment and violations of
 an order for protection, and the number of convictions in this
 case. The family court sentenced Pecpec to a one-year term of
 incarceration on each count, to run concurrently, with the
 
-21­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
exception of Count 13 for which the sentence was to run
 
consecutive to the remaining counts. As to the sentence on Count
 13, the court explained:
 
[T]he [c]ourt takes particular note that
[Pecpec] in this conversation, which is Count [13],
which I believe is Exhibit 17, which was recorded on
11 -- November 6, 2009, [Pecpec] blames the victim for
sending him to jail and that she’s -- and that because
he went to jail because of her it made him stronger.
And then he goes on to indicate to her that there’s a
price to pay for all these things, which the [c]ourt
interprets in its context to be a threat to the
victim’s life. The [c]ourt takes this serious [sic].
The [c]ourt finds in Count [13] that the circumstances
of this case, as well as the facts and circumstances
as the [c]ourt has already indicated [with regard to
Pecpec’s history of violence against CW and his
violations of other protective orders], warrants that
[Pecpec] be sentenced in Count [13] to one year
consecutive to the other counts.
 
On May 4, 2010, the family court issued a Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence.12 Pecpec filed his Notice of Appeal on
 
May 13, 2010. On June 4, 2010, the family court issued its
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, convicting Pecpec on
 counts 7 through 25 and sentencing him to a one-year term of
 incarceration on each count, to run concurrently, with the
 exception of Count 13 for which the sentence was to run
 
consecutive to the remaining counts. 
B. Appeal
 
In his opening brief, Pecpec argued that the family
 
court should have given the jury a specific unanimity instruction
 
because “[t]he State presented evidence of more than one act
 
12
 This judgment did not state whether Pecpec was convicted of any
charges. 
-22­ 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which could support conviction in each count of the complaint, 
and its election was not clear on the record.” (Citing Arceo, 84 Hawai
'i at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (1996)) (holding that, where 
the State presents evidence of multiple instances of misconduct but charges only one, the State must elect which act underlies the charge or the trial court must issue a specific unanimity 
instruction).  Pecpec contended that the verdicts “were not 
supported by unanimous agreement upon a single act constituting 
the offense in each count[,]” and accordingly violated his right to a unanimous verdict under the United States and Hawai
'i 
constitutions. Pecpec acknowledged that a Powerpoint presentation used during the State’s closing argument contained “slides with [sic] connect Counts of the Complaint to particular exhibits identified by date and number.” However, Pecpec argued that the Powerpoint slides “should not be construed as an election” because they are not “clearly referenced or entered in the record[.]”
13 
Pecpec also challenged his consecutive term sentence on
 
Count 13 on the ground that the jury verdict was not unanimous. 
Pecpec stated that the family court “unilaterally assigned to
 this particular count[] the conduct portrayed in State’s Exhibit
 
13
 The State did not address the Powerpoint slides, and did not argue
that it elected the specific exhibit that supported each count. Moreover, as
noted by Pecpec, the Powerpoint slides are not contained in the record on
appeal. Accordingly, we do not consider them.
 
-23­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17.” 
In its answering brief, the State asserted that it
 
“introduced 19 separately identified exhibits that memorialized
 
19 distinct contacts [Pecpec] made with [CW] as the proof he
 committed the 19 different offenses charged” in Counts 7 through
 25. Therefore, the State argued, Arceo was inapplicable because
 
that case dealt with multiple acts underlying a single charged
 offense, rather than an equal number of acts and counts. The
 State also contended that “any uncertainty with regard to the
 unanimity of the jury’s guilty verdicts for the [voicemail]
 counts is erased by” Pecpec’s admission on cross that he left the
 voicemails that were played in court. As to the consecutive term
 sentence on Count 13, the State argued that, because the jury
 unanimously found Pecpec guilty of the violation memorialized in
 Exhibit 17, and because Pecpec admitted to leaving the voicemail
 contained in Exhibit 17, the imposition of a consecutive term
 sentence based on that exhibit did not constitute an abuse of
 discretion. 
Pecpec reiterated in his reply brief, that “each
 
[count] could [have been] supported by more than one of the acts
 alleged” and that the State did not “establish or even contend
 that the exhibits of November 6, 2008 are connected to any
 
specific count in the complaint.” Pecpec further argued that “it
 
is insufficient to present a number of exhibits to prove the same
 
-24­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
amount of counts, expecting that the jury attributes the
 
exhibits, in chronological or numerical order, to the counts in
 sequence.” 
In a summary disposition order signed by Judges
 
Nakamura and Ginoza, a majority of the Intermediate Court of
 Appeals (ICA) held that the family court did not err by not
 providing a specific unanimity instruction. Pecpec, 2011 WL
 
2037679, at *1. Specifically, the majority concluded that:
 
The jury was afforded sufficient guidance to know what
it had to conclude in order to convict on the multiple
counts asserted against Pecpec, and there is no
genuine possibility of jury confusion given the record
in this case. The prosecution presented evidence and
asserted throughout this case that Pecpec committed a
total of twenty-five acts (voice mails or texts) which
were the basis for the twenty-five counts of violating
a Protective Order that prohibited Pecpec from
contacting the complainant, his ex-wife.
 
Id.
 
The majority also noted that Pecpec admitted leaving
 
the voicemails that were played in court; the family court
 
instructed the jury in various ways that its verdict must be
 unanimous; and there was a one-to-one relationship between the
 number of counts and the number of exhibits, which distinguished
 this case from Arceo. Id. at *2-5. Finally, the majority noted
 
that “for Counts 7-25, the jury convicted on all the counts for
 dates on which multiple counts were charged. For this to occur,
 the jury must have unanimously found that Pecpec engaged in each
 of the prohibited contacts reflected in the exhibits.” Id. at
 
-25­   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
*5. Accordingly, the ICA held that Pecpec was not entitled to
 
relief.14 Id.
 
The majority also rejected Pecpec’s arguments
 
concerning the consecutive term sentence on Count 13, noting that
 
the family court conferred with both counsel before relying on
 Exhibit 17, and the voicemail contained in Exhibit 17 “was an act
 by Pecpec upon which the jury unanimously agreed to convict.” 
Id. Accordingly, the majority affirmed the family court’s
 
judgment. Id.
 
Judge Reifurth concurred in part and dissented in
 
part.
15 Id. at *5-6. The dissent agreed with the majority that
 
no specific unanimity instruction was necessary for counts
 alleging violations on dates for which there was only one
 voicemail or text message, i.e., Count 7 (a voicemail on October
 22, 2000), Count 16 (a voicemail on November 7, 2009), and Count
 17 (a voicemail on November 8, 2009). Id. at *7. However, the
 
dissent would have required a specific unanimity instruction for
 dates where multiple violations of the same type were charged,
 i.e., Counts 8-15 (voicemails on November 6, 2009), Counts 18-22
 (text messages on November 6, 2009), and Counts 23-25 (text
 
14
 Despite this holding, the majority noted that, had the State
specified the time or content of the voicemails and text messages for each
count of the complaint, it would have eliminated any issues regarding
unanimity. Id. at *5.
 
15
 For ease of reference, we refer to the concurring and dissenting
opinion as the “dissent.”
 
-26­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
messages on November 7, 2009). Id. The dissent expressed
 
concern that some of the jurors may have believed that a single
 
act supported multiple counts of the complaint. Id. The dissent
 
illustrated this concept as follows:
 
For example, Juror 1 might conclude that Exhibit
15 (voice mail received November 6, 2009 at 1:00 p.m.)
supports conviction on Count 8 and that Exhibit 16
(voice mail received November 6, 2009 at 1:25 p.m.)
supports conviction on Count 9, while Juror 2 does not
believe that Exhibit 15 supports a conviction at all,
but that Exhibit 16 supports a conviction on both
Counts 8 and 9. Under those circumstances, [Pecpec]
is denied his constitutional right to a unanimous
verdict on Count 8 under article I, sections 5 and 14
of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Id. (footnotes omitted).
 
Accordingly, the dissent would have vacated the family
 
court’s judgment as to the convictions on Counts 8-15 and 18-25
 
and remanded for further proceedings. Id. at *9.
 
The ICA filed its judgment affirming the family court’s
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence on June 7, 2011. 
Pecpec timely filed his application on July 29, 2011, in which he
 raises the following questions:
 
Did the [ICA] err by violating [Pecpec’s] right
to unanimous jury verdict guaranteed under Amendment
VI to the U.S. Constitution and Art. I, §14 of the
Constitution of the State of Hawaii, in affirming
[Pecpec’s] convictions where no Specific Unanimity
Instruction was given to the jury and the State did
not make an election of counts? 
Did the ICA err in violating [Pecpec’s] right to
due process Amendment VI to the U.S. Constitution and
Art. I, §14 of the Constitution of the State of
Hawai'i, Equal Protection Under the Law Amendments V
and XIV to the U.S. Constitution and Art. I, §§5 and
14 of the State of Hawaii Constitution and cruel and
 unusual punishment Amendment VIII th [sic] the U.S.
Constitution and Art. I, §12 of the Constitution of
 
-27­ 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the State of Hawaii by affirming consecutive sentence
predicated on verdicts which were not unanimous?
 
(Internal brackets omitted).
 
The State did not file a response. 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Omission of Jury Instructions
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof
are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is
whether, when read and considered as a whole, the
instructions given are prejudicially insufficient,
erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.
Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively
appears from the record as a whole that the error was
not prejudicial.
 
Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i at 11, 928 P.2d at 853 (internal quotation 
marks, brackets, and citations omitted); see also State v.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 337, 141 P.3d 974, 984 (2006) (“[O]nce 
instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, without
 
regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a
 reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
 defendant’s conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction
 was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.”).
 
B. Sentencing
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad
discretion in imposing a sentence. The applicable
standard of review for sentencing or resentencing
matters is whether the court committed plain and
manifest abuse of discretion in its decision. Factors
 which indicate a plain and manifest abuse of
discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant’s
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse
it must appear that the court clearly exceeded the
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
 
-28­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
party litigant. 
State v. Rauch, 94 Hawai 'i 315, 322, 13 P.3d 324, 331 (2000) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted). 
III. Discussion
 
Pecpec argues that his convictions on Counts 8-15,
 
18-22 and 23-25 were obtained in violation of his right to a
 
unanimous verdict because the State did not elect which exhibits
 corresponded to which counts, and the family court did not give
 the jury a specific unanimity instruction. Pecpec also argues
 that his consecutive sentence on Count 13 violates his
 constitutional rights because it was “impossible to know” whether
 Exhibit 17 corresponded to Count 13. 
As set forth below, this court held in Mundon that a 
specific unanimity instruction is required where multiple counts are supported by the same number of acts, but the jury is not informed as to which act corresponds with each count. 121 Hawai
'i at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42. The facts in Mundon are 
materially similar to those in the instant case. See id. at 354, 
219 P.3d at 1141. Accordingly, the family court should have given a specific unanimity instruction, and its failure to do so was error. See id. at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42. 
However, this error was harmless beyond a reasonable
 
doubt because there is no “genuine possibility” that different
 jurors relied on different acts to support Pecpec’s convictions. 
-29­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Cf. id. As discussed in detail infra, the jury was presented
 
with 19 exhibits, and convicted Pecpec on 19 counts that
 
corresponded to the dates on which the conduct in those exhibits
 allegedly occurred. The presentation of the evidence, jury
 instructions, and arguments of both counsel made clear that there
 was a one-to-one relationship between counts and exhibits. Thus,
 there is no reasonable possibility that Pecpec was convicted on
 less than a unanimous verdict.
 
Nevertheless, we conclude that the family court abused
 
its discretion in sentencing Pecpec to a consecutive sentence on
 Count 13, because the record does not reflect that the jury found
 Pecpec guilty on that count based specifically on the conduct
 memorialized in Exhibit 17. 
A.	 Although a specific unanimity instruction was required in
the instant case, the family court’s failure to give such an
instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
 
This court has stated that the right of an accused to a
 
unanimous jury verdict is guaranteed by the sixth amendment to
 
the United States Constitution
16 and article I, sections 5 and
 
16
 The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution provides: 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall
enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an
impartial jury of the State and district wherein the
crime shall have been committed, which district shall
have been previously ascertained by law, and to be
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to
be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his
favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his
defence.
 
-30­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1417 of the Hawai 'i Constitution. Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i at 30, 928 
P.2d at 872. In Arceo, this court addressed the right to a
 
unanimous jury verdict, where a single count is supported by
 multiple acts. Id. at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75. There, the
 
defendant was charged with one count of sexual assault in the
 third degree (Count 1) and one count of sexual assault in the
 first degree (Count 2). Id. at 2-3, 928 P.2d at 844-45. At
 
trial, the complaining witness testified to multiple acts of
 sexual contact in support of Count 1, and multiple acts of sexual
 penetration in support of Count 2. Id. at 3, 928 P.2d at 845. 
The jury found the defendant guilty on both counts. Id. at 10,
 
17 Article 1, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides: “No
person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of
law, nor be denied the equal protection of the laws, nor be denied the
enjoyment of the person’s civil rights or be discriminated against in the
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or ancestry.”
 
Article 1, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides: 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall
enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an
impartial jury of the district wherein the crime shall
have been committed, which district shall have been
previously ascertained by law, or of such other
district to which the prosecution may be removed with
the consent of the accused; to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted
with the witnesses against the accused, provided that
the legislature may provide by law for the
inadmissibility of privileged confidential
communications between an alleged crime victim and the
alleged crime victim’s physician, psychologist,
counselor or licensed mental health professional; to
have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in the
accused’s favor; and to have the assistance of counsel
for the accused’s defense. Juries, where the crime
charged is serious, shall consist of twelve persons.
The State shall provide counsel for an indigent
defendant charged with an offense punishable by
imprisonment. 
-31­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
928 P.2d at 852. 
On appeal, the defendant argued that the trial court
 
should have required the prosecution to elect the specific acts
 
it was relying on in seeking convictions, or should have given
 the jury a specific unanimity instruction as to each count. Id.
 
at 3, 928 P.2d at 845. This court agreed and held that: 
when separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed
within a single count charging a sexual assault—any
one of which could support a conviction thereunder—and
the defendant is ultimately convicted by a jury of the
charged offense, the defendant’s constitutional right
to a unanimous verdict is violated unless one or both
 of the following occurs: (1) at or before the close of
its case-in-chief, the prosecution is required to
elect the specific act upon which it is relying to
establish the “conduct” element of the charged
offense; or (2) the trial court gives the jury a
specific unanimity instruction, i.e., an instruction
that advises the jury that all twelve of its members
must agree that the same underlying criminal act has
been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Id. at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (emphasis added).
 
Arceo is distinguishable from the instant case, because
 
the holding was dependent on there being “separate and distinct
 
culpable acts [] subsumed within a single count[.]” Id. In that
 
circumstance, there is a “genuine possibility” that the jurors
 may not unanimously agree that the defendant committed the same
 act for each count. Id. (citation omitted). For instance, given
 
two acts underlying a single count, some jurors may believe that
 the defendant engaged in one act but not the other, while other
 jurors may believe the opposite. In such a situation, the jury’s
 verdict would not be unanimous as to either alleged act. In
 
-32­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
contrast, in the instant case, the State did not present evidence
 
of multiple acts that could support conviction under each count. 
To the contrary, the 19 counts on which Pecpec was found guilty
 were supported at trial by 19 exhibits, with each exhibit
 
reflecting a single act. 
Accordingly, this case is more analogous to Mundon,
 
where the defendant was charged with two counts of terroristic
 
threatening in the first degree (TT1) based on two distinct acts,
 but the jury found him guilty on only one count. 121 Hawai
'i at 
354, 219 P.3d at 1141. There, this court noted that a unanimity
 instruction would not have been required under Arceo, but
 nevertheless recognized that “the jury should be given a specific
 unanimity instruction under additional circumstances.” Id. at
 
353, 219 P.3d at 1140. This court stated its holding as follows:
 
Because the jury: (1) was not given a specific
unanimity instruction with respect to the offense of
TT1; (2) was never informed which act committed by
Mundon coincided with counts 4 and 26, respectively;
and (3) convicted Mundon of one count of TT1 and
acquitted him of the other, there is a genuine
possibility that different jurors concluded that
Mundon committed different acts. . . . Thus, there
may not have been a unanimous verdict as to Mundon’s
conviction for TT1. Accordingly, we hold that, to
correct any potential confusion in this case, a
specific unanimity instruction should have been given
to ensure that the jury understood its duty to
unanimously agree to a particular set of facts, and
that the trial court plainly erred in failing to
provide such an instruction.
 
Id. at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42 (emphasis added) (citation,
 
quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
This court’s holding in Mundon relied in part on the
 
-33­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jury having acquitted the defendant of one of the charged
 
counts.18 Accordingly, it could be argued that a unanimity
 
instruction is required under Mundon only where the defendant is
 found guilty on fewer counts than there are acts. However, a
 trial court cannot decide to give a unanimity instruction after
 the jury returns its verdict. Accordingly, the reasonable
 inference from Mundon is that a unanimity instruction is required
 in the circumstances of the instant case, i.e., where the number
 of acts charged is identical to the number of acts offered in
 evidence, but the jury is not informed as to which act coincides
 with each count.
19
 
18 The dissent suggests that this court found a genuine possibility
of juror confusion in Mundon solely because “the prosecution did not specify
which act coincided with each count and the court did not give the jury a
specific unanimity instruction.” Dissenting opinion at 17. However, as
noted, this court relied on three factors in concluding that there was a
genuine possibility for juror confusion in Mundon: (1) no unanimity
instruction was given; (2) the jury was not informed as which act corresponded
with each count; and (3) the jury convicted Mundon on one count and acquitted
him on the other. Id. at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42. 
19 In oral argument, the State argued that State v. Keomany, 97 
Hawai'i 140, 34 P.3d 1039 (App. 2000), is applicable to the present case. See 
Oral Arguments before the Supreme Court (Oct. 6, 2011), available athttp://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc30500.html. There, the defendant was indicted for and convicted on three counts of sexualassault in the first degree based on three distinct acts, and two counts ofsexual assault in the third degree based on two distinct acts. Keomany, 97 
Hawai'i at 143-45, 154, 34 P.3d at 1042-44, 1053. The ICA held that, under
those circumstances, a specific unanimity instruction was not required. Id. 
at 154, 34 P.3d at 1053. The ICA distinguished Arceo because “there were morediscrete acts than counts” in Arceo, but an equal number of acts and counts inKeomany. Id. In a concurring opinion, Judge Watanabe recognized that a
specific unanimity instruction was not required under this court’s caselaw,and opined that, “since the jury returned guilty verdicts as to all of thesexual assault counts, any error caused by individual jurors consideringdifferent instances of culpable conduct for each count is probably harmless.”Id. at 155, 34 P.3d at 1054.
The State is correct that, under the rule in Keomany, a specific
unanimity instruction would not be required in the instant case. However,
(continued...)
 
-34­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In the instant case, the record does not reflect that 
the jury was informed of the act that corresponded to each count. 
Accordingly, under Mundon, the family court was required to provide the jury with a specific unanimity instruction, and its failure to do so constitutes error. 121 Hawai
'i at 354-55, 219 
P.3d at 1141-42. Erroneous instructions are a ground for reversal “unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.” Id. at 349, 219 P.3d 
1136 (quoting Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981). “In 
that context, the real question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to conviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt[.]” Arceo, 84 Hawai
'i at 12, 928 P.2d at 854 (citations 
omitted). 
The purpose of a specific unanimity instruction is to
 
protect a defendant’s constitutional right to a unanimous
 verdict, where jurors otherwise would not know they are required
 
19(...continued)
Keomany preceded our decision in Mundon, which held that a specific unanimity
instruction was required under circumstances similar to those presented here.121 Hawai' i at 355, 219 P.2d at 1142. Accordingly, Keomany is unpersuasive.
In oral argument, the State also argued that State v. Horswill, 75
Haw. 152, 158-59, 857 P.2d 579, 582-83 (1993), stands for the proposition that
a unanimity instruction is not required where there are an equal number of
acts and counts. However, Horswill did not address a defendant’s
constitutional right to a unanimous verdict, id., and in any event, preceded
our decisions in Arceo and Mundon, which identify the circumstances under
which such an instruction is required.
 
-35­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to unanimously agree that the defendant had committed the same 
act. See Mundon, 121 Hawai 'i at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42. In 
the circumstances of the instant case, where the number of acts offered into evidence corresponds to the number of counts, the instruction guards against a potential lack of unanimity in the event the defendant is, for example, acquitted on one or more counts. See id. In the case of an acquittal, the one-to-one 
relationship between counts and acts is unclear, and there is therefore a “‘genuine possibility’ that different jurors concluded [the defendant] committed different acts.” Mundon, 121 
Hawai
'i at 354, 219 P.3d at 1141. 
However, in the instant case, there is no “reasonable
 
possibility” that the jurors did not unanimously agree that
 Pecpec committed each of the 19 acts represented in the State’s
 exhibits. The presentation of evidence, jury instructions, and
 arguments of counsel
20 made clear that there was a one-to-one
 
relationship between the State’s exhibits and the charged counts. 
Accordingly, each juror must have concluded that Pecpec had
 committed each of the acts represented in the exhibits in order
 to have found him guilty on 19 counts. 
Moreover, the jury was instructed 25 separate times,
 
20
 Although “arguments of counsel are not evidence[,]” State v. 
Yamada, 108 Hawai' i 474, 480 n.9, 122 P.3d 254, 260 n.9 (2005), they are
nonetheless relevant to our analysis here. The arguments of counsel were
consistent with the presentation of evidence and the jury instructions, whichreflected a one-to-one relationship between acts and counts. 
-36­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
i.e., once for each count, as to the elements of the offense. 
The jury also was instructed 25 separate times that it was
 required to return a verdict of “Not guilty” or “Guilty as
 charged of Violation of An Order for Protection” on each count. 
Finally, the jury was instructed 25 separate times, “Your verdict
 must be unanimous.” Thus, it would have been unreasonable for a
 juror to believe that a single exhibit could have satisfied the
 State’s burden of proof on more than one count. 
Counsels’ arguments reinforced the one-to-one
 
relationship between acts and counts. In its opening statement,
 the State asserted that, “between October 19 and November 8th of
 [2009], [Pecpec] left 25 voice mails and text messages total for
 the complainant” and that “Pecpec is charged with 25 counts of
 Violation of an Order for Protection.” During closing argument,
 the State argued:
 
For each violation of an Order for Protection,
the State needs to prove four things. . . .
 
. . . . 
Now, turning to the third element -- and again,
these apply to each of the 25 charges -- did he
intentionally or knowingly engage in conduct that was
prohibited by the Order for Protection? 
. . . .
 
Well, it wasn’t an accident. He left her 17
voice mails. You heard the voice mails. . . . He
 
sent her eight text messages. He acknowledged the
text message referring to the GPS. . . .
 . . . .
 
Now, you have before you 25 counts and numerous
dates of incidents. 
Let’s go over it quickly to try
to break it down and make it a little easier.
 
Okay. So we’re talking about 25 counts of
Violation of an Order for Protection. We know that
 
they fall into two categories -- voice mails and text
 messages. The 
voice mails would be your first 17
counts, Counts [1] to [17]. The text messages would
 
-37­ ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
be your next eight counts, Counts [18] to [25].
Now, let’s look first at the voice mails. The
 
voice mails are grouped in terms of the dates of
incident. Counts [1] through [6] are from October 19,
2009; Count [7] is from October 22; Counts [8] to [15]
are November 6; Count [16] from November 7; and Count
[17] is from November 8.
Now, you listened to voice mails. These voice
 
mails are also associated with these dates. Exhibit
 
23 is the voice mail from October 22; Exhibit[s] 15 to
22 are from November 6; Exhibit 14 is from November 7;
Exhibit 13 is from November 8.
 
Switching now to the text messages. Counts [18]
to [25], they are also grouped in terms of the dates
of incident. Counts [18] to [22] are from November 6;
Counts [22] to [25] are from November 7. For each of
 these text messages there are exhibits. Exhibits 5
 
through 9 are the text messages from November 6; and
Exhibits 10 to 12 are the text messages from November
7.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, you heard all the
evidence. You’ve seen the witnesses testify.
Defendant Orlando Pecpec is guilty of 25 counts of
Violation of an Order for Protection.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Likewise, defense’s closing fairly indicated a one-to­
one relationship between the counts and the acts:
 
Okay. Now, let’s further review the testimony as
to each count.
 
[CW] admitted to you in court that she knows
that the Order for Protection allowed [Pecpec] to have
limited contact with her regarding attending courtroom
proceedings. You know what? For Count I, October
19th, 2009, at 10:03, that’s exactly what had
happened. [Pecpec] -- we know from (indiscernible)
also, too, that there was a hearing. We know that
 [Pecpec] got to court late, at about 9:30. He
 testified that he then called [CW] to ask about the
hearing. The time frame of the -- of the call and the
 circumstances, that he was late, about the -- that he
-- about the time that the call was made, as [CW]
says, supports [Pecpec’s] testimony. And that’s what
 [Pecpec’s] call was about and not as what [CW] would
have you to believe. You know that [CW] lacks
credibility because of the inconsistent -­inconsistencies in her testimony about the lack of
reporting on the October 19th, 2009, messages. I’ve
 spoken about this just briefly before. But let me go
into detail.
 
This has to do with Counts [2], [3], and [4].
She testified, as I said before, touched on it
lightly. She says that -- she testified that the
 
-38­   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reason she did not make the recordings of messages
supposedly left by [Pecpec] on the morning of the 19th
-- October 19th, 2009, at 10:14, 10:24, and 10:26 were
because she had written down whatever the message said
on the statement she gave to police.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
And finally, in rebuttal closing, the State again
 
highlighted the one-to-one relationship between the counts and
 
the contacts:
 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Order for Protection
prohibits him, prohibits [Pecpec] from contacting
[CW], threatening her. State has shown beyond a
reasonable doubt that he did just that 25 times.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Because the one-to-one relationship between counts and
 
acts was made clear to the jury, and the jury found Pecpec guilty
 
on 19 counts for which 19 exhibits were presented at trial, there
 is no “‘genuine possibility’ that different jurors concluded that
 [the defendant] committed different acts.”
21 Cf. Mundon, 121
 
21 The dissent, relying on Arceo, suggests that it is “speculation” 
to conclude that the jury unanimously found Pecpec had committed each of the
19 acts offered in support of the 19 counts. Dissenting opinion at 24.However, as stated, Arceo is distinguishable from the instant case, because itinvolved “separate and distinct culpable acts [] subsumed within a singlecount,” and therefore a “genuine possibility” that the jurors may not haveunanimously agreed that the defendant committed the same act. 84 Hawai' i at 
32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (citation omitted). In contrast, in the instantcase, the State did not present evidence of multiple acts that could supportconviction under each count. To the contrary, the 19 counts on which Pecpecwas found guilty were supported at trial by 19 exhibits, with each exhibitreflecting a single act. Accordingly, there is no reasonable possibility that
Pecpec was convicted on less than a unanimous verdict.
In addition, the ICA dissent opined that some of the jurors may
have relied on one act in order to find Pecpec guilty on more than one count.
Pecpec, 2011 WL 2037679, at *7. Put another way, the ICA dissent was
concerned that some jurors may not have been aware of the one-to-one
relationship between the counts and acts. However, because we conclude that
the one-to-one relationship would have been clear to a reasonable juror, we do
(continued...)
 
-39­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Hawai'i at 354-55, 219 P.3d at 1141-42 (citation omitted); State 
v. Valentine, 93 Hawai 'i 199, 208, 998 P.2d 479, 488 (2000) 
(holding that no specific unanimity instruction was necessary 
because “there was no danger that the jury would be confused regarding the conduct of which [the defendant] was accused and that constituted the charged offense”). Accordingly, the family court’s error in failing to give a unanimity instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
B.	 The family court abused its discretion in sentencing Pecpec
to a consecutive term on Count 13
 
Pecpec argues that the family court erred in sentencing
 
him to a consecutive term on Count 13 based on the act
 represented in Exhibit 17 because the verdict on that count was
 not unanimous. 
However, as discussed supra, the jury must have
 
unanimously concluded that Pecpec committed the act represented
 in Exhibit 17 to have found him guilty on all 19 counts. 
Nevertheless, Pecpec argues that the sentence was improper
 because, “it was impossible to know which acts of 11/6/08
 attached to which counts of the indictment [sic.]” Pecpec
 contends that “the trial court should not be connecting exhibit
 17 to count 13 ‘after conferring with counsel for both the
 prosecution and the defense[.]’” (Quoting Pecpec, 2011 WL
 2037679, at *5). We agree.
 
21(...continued)
not find a genuine possibility for juror confusion in this respect. 
-40­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
It is axiomatic that a criminal sentence is imposed in
 
relation to a specific offense upon which a defendant has been
 
found guilty. See HRS § 706-605 (Supp. 2006) (“Authorized
 
disposition of convicted defendants”) (emphasis added); HRS
 § 706-605 cmt. (“This section states the various sentencing
 alternatives that are available to the court upon conviction of a
 defendant for an offense.”) (emphasis added). However, in the
 instant case, the record does not reflect that the jury
 specifically correlated Exhibit 17 with Count 13. Accordingly,
 the family court sentenced Pecpec based on conduct that was not
 necessarily linked to Count 13 by the jury. 
In addition, although the family court asked both
 
counsel which count of the complaint reflected the conduct in
 Exhibit 17, defense counsel was unable to respond because he
 “didn’t bring [his] complete file.” Accordingly, defense counsel
 did not affirmatively correlate Exihibit 17 with Count 13. 
Finally, we note that the complaint identified specific police
 reports as relating to each count. Based on those police
 reports, it appears that Exhibit 17, which CW testified was
 received on November 6, 2011 at 1:28 p.m., would correspond to
 Count 10, rather than Count 13. 
In sum, the record does not support an inference that
 
the jury found Pecpec guilty on Count 13 based specifically on
 
-41­***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the conduct memorialized in Exhibit 17.22 Accordingly, the
 
family court abused its discretion in sentencing Pecpec to a
 
consecutive term on that basis.23
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate Pecpec’s sentence
 
on Count 13 and remand for resentencing. We affirm the family
 court’s judgment of conviction and sentence in all other respects.
 
Stuart N. Fujioka for
petitioner/defendant­appellant. /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 Keith M. Kaneshiro, 
Prosecuting Attorney,
and Donn Fudo, Deputy
Prosecuting Attorney,
for respondent/
plaintiff-appellee.
 
22 We respectfully disagree with the dissent’s assertion that we have
concluded “that the verdict on Count 13 ‘was not unanimous.’” Dissenting
opinion at 14. Our concern with regard to Count 13 is not based on a
purported lack of unanimity, and is limited to the court’s sentence, rather
than the jury’s verdict. As stated, we vacate the consecutive term sentence
on Count 13 because the record does not reflect that the jury specifically
correlated Exhibit 17 to Count 13. We note that a unanimity instruction would
not cure this defect, as it nonetheless would not be apparent which exhibit
the jury relied on in convicting on Count 13. 
23
 Based on our resolution of this issue, we do not address Pecpec’s
argument that the consecutive term sentence violated his rights to dueprocess, equal protection, and against cruel and unusual punishment under theUnited States and Hawai' i constitutions. 
-42­