***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
In re Application of MAUI ELECTRIC COMPANY, LIMITED, 
For Approval of the Amended and Restated Power Purchase Agreement 
With Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company.  
 
 
SCWC-15-0000640 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000640; PUC DOCKET NO. 2015-0094) 
 
DECEMBER 14 , 2017 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, and WILSON, JJ., WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J.,  
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
 
  Article XI, section 9 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution 
guarantees each person “the right to a clean and healthful 
environment, as defined by laws relating to environmental 
quality.”  Article I, section 5 provides that “[n]o person shall 
be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of 
law.”  This case raises the issue of whether the protections of 
the due process clause apply to the 
right to a clean and Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000640
14-DEC-2017
10:05 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 2 healthful environment as defined by  laws relat ed to 
environmental quality.  We hold that, under the circumstances of 
this case, the petitioners asserted a protectable property 
interest in a clean and healthful environment as defined by 
environmental regulat ions; that the  agency decision adversely 
affected this interest; and that a due process hearing was 
required given the importance of the interest, the risk of an 
erroneous deprivation, and the governmental interests  involved . 
I. BACKGROUND 
  This case involves a power purchase agreement between 
Maui Electric Company, Limited (“Maui Electric”), an electric 
1utility company,  and Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Company (HC&S ), 
a producer of electricity.  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)  § 269-
16.22, relating to power purchase agreements, allows electric 
utility companies to recover all power purchase costs from 
customers subject to the approval of the Public Utilities 
2Commission (“Commission” or PUC).  
  Maui Electric filed an application with the Commission 
on March 31, 2015 (the “Application”) , seeking approval of a 
                                                        
 1 An “electric utility company” is a public utility as defined 
under Hawaii Revised Statutes  § 269-1 “for the production, conveyance, 
transmission, delivery, or furnishing of electric power.”  HRS § 269 -16.22 
(Supp. 2012); see also  id. § 269-1 (Supp. 2013) (defining “public utility”).  
 2 The Commission is responsible for the regulation of public  
utilities in the State.  HRS §§ 269 -2, 269-6 (Supp. 2013).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 3 power purchase agreement between Maui Electric and HC&S (the 
“Agreement”).  The Application indicated that the Agreement 
restated and amended an existing power purchase agreement 
between Maui Electric and HC&S.  Maui Electric sought the 
Commission’s approval of the Agreement , a finding that the 
energy charges to be incurred under the Agreement were just and 
reasonable, 
a finding that the “purchased power arrangement” 
under the Agreement was  prudent and in the public interest,  and 
an authorization to charge consumers for the energy costs 
3through its existing energy cost adjustment clause.  
  The existing agreement between the parties was 
approved by the Commission in 1990 and was negotiated to 
continue in effect through December 31, 1999, and on a year- to-
year basis thereafter subject to termination.  The A pplication 
noted that, if the Commission did not issue an order approving 
the Agreement on or before September 30, 2015, the existing 
agreement between the parties could be terminated by either 
party. 
  Under the existing agreement, Maui Electric  had been 
purchasing energy produced by HC&S at its facility located in 
Puʻunene, Maui (the “Puʻunene Plant ”).  The Pu ʻunene Plant 
                                                        
 3 The Application also sought authorization to include the 
purchased energy charges in Maui Electric’s revenue requirements for 
ratemaking purposes; however, this request was subsequently withdrawn. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 4 consisted of a sugar processing operation with an internal 
bagasse-fired power plant that also burned a  number of other 
4fuels, including coal and petroleum
.   Under the Agreement, Maui 
Electric would continue to purchase energy generated at the 
Puʻunene Plant.  According to Maui Electric, the Agreement would, 
inter alia, amend the pricing structure and rates for energy 
purchases under the existing agreement between Maui Electric and 
HC&S; eliminate capacity payments Maui Electric was making to 
HC&S under the existing agreement; eliminate Maui Electric ’s 
existing minimum purchase obligation; and extend the arrangement 
between the parties from 2014 to 2017. 
  On April 17, 2015, Sierra Club timely filed a motion 
5 6to intervene  or to participate without intervention  in the 
                                                        
 4 The Division of Consumer Advocacy’s Statement of Position 
provided the following:  
The Consumer Advocate also recognizes that, even though 
Maui Electric refers to the [Pu ʻunene Plant] as an internal 
bagasse fired power plant, the unit burns a number  of other 
fuels, including coal and petroleum.  The Consumer Advocate 
also recognizes that continued reliance on older thermal 
units that burn fossil fuels is not consistent with the 
State’s goal of  100% renewable energy by 2045.  
 5 Pursuant to Hawai i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6-61-55(a ) 
(1992), “[a] person may make an application to intervene and become a party 
by filing a timely written motion in accordance with sections 6 -61
-15 to 6-
61-24, section 6- 61-41, and section 6 -61 -57, stating the facts and reasons 
for the proposed intervention and the position and interest of the 
applicant.” 
 6 HAR § 6- 61-56, titled “Participation without intervention ,” 
provides in pertinent part as follows:  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 5 proceedings concerning the Application in order to assist the 
Commission in fully developing the facts and law regarding the 
fuel mix at the Pu ʻunene Plant and other matters at issue in the 
proceeding.  Sierra Club sought intervention on behalf of itself 
and its members who live in close proximity to the Puʻ unene 
Plant.  In its motion, Sierra Club asserted a fundamental due 
process right to participate in a hearing on the grounds that 
the Agreement would impac t Sierra Club’s members’ he alth, 
aesthetic, and recreational interests.  Sierra Club also 
asserted its organizational interest in reducing Hawaii ’s 
dependence on imported fossil fuels and advancing a clean energy 
grid. 
  Sierra Club argued that its members were concerned 
that the Pu ʻunene Plant relied too heavily on coal in order to 
meet its power obligations under the existing agreement and also 
that its members were concerned “about the public health and 
visibility impacts of burnin g coal.”  Statistics provided by 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
The commission may permit participation without 
intervention.  A person or entity in whose behalf an 
appearance is entered in this manner is not a party to the 
proceeding and may participate in the proceeding only to 
the degree ordered by the commission.  The extent to which 
a participant may be involved in the proceeding  shall be 
determined in the order granting participation or in the 
prehearing order.  
HAR § 6- 61-56(a) (1992). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 6 Sierra Club indicated that the fuel mix burned at the Pu ʻunene 
Plant for energy generation from 2010 to 2012 was comprised of 
approximately twenty-five per cent coal and petroleum.  Sierra 
Club asserted that members on an ongoing basis were forced to 
close the windows of their homes and run air filters to protect 
against harmful pollution.  Sierra Club also noted that the 
Department of Health sought to impose a fine of over one million 
dollars on HC&S in the previous year as a result of more than 
7four hundred violations of the Clean Air Act.   Sierra Club 
asserted that the Pu ʻunene Plant was permitted to burn coal and 
petroleum, operated without modern pollution controls, and 
consistently violated limits set by the Clean Air Act.  Sierra 
Club also contended that there was an issue of how much energy 
at the plant could be considered “renewable power” under HRS § 
269-92(b)(4), which relates to standards that prescribe what 
portions of the renewable portfolio standards may be met by 
                                                        
 7 Included in the record was a “Notice and Finding of Violation” 
issued to HC&S by the Clean Air Branch of the Department of Health of the 
State of Hawaiʻ i.  Amongst the violations listed in the notice were violations 
of HAR § 11- 60.1-32(b) concerning visible emissions.  The Notice and Finding 
of Violation assessed an administrative penalty of $1,335,000.00.  These 
alleged violations were not adjudicated in an agency proceeding as HC&S later 
agreed to a Consent Order settling all civil liability for the alleged 
violations in June 2016.  Dep’t of Health v. Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Co. , 
14-CA-EO-01 (June 7, 2016), 
http://health.hawaii.gov/cab/files/2016/06/2016_06_07__No._14 -CA-EO-01-HCS-
CO-signed-by-DDEH.pdf.  In the Consent Order, HC&S agreed to a $600,000 fine; 
to relinquish certain equipment, related hardware, and supplies; and to 
maintain air quality monitoring equipment at local schools.  Id. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 7 specific types of energy sources.  Sierra Club maintained that 
the proceedings would determine the future obligations of the 
Puʻunene Plant to supply power to Maui Electric , “which is a de 
facto determination [of] whether the plant will continue to burn 
coal.” 
  Sierra Club attached the affidavits of two of their 
members to the motion for intervention or participation.  Clare 
Apana, a Wailuku resident who is able to see the Pu ʻunene Plant’s 
smokestack from her home,  stated the following in her affidavit:  
4.  I have concerns about the coal burning at Puʻ unene.  I 
understand that burning coal results in emissions of 
dangerous air pollutants such as particulate matter, sulfur 
dioxide, nitrogen oxides, mercury, and other toxic 
pollutants.  I know that these pollutants  can cause or 
contribute to a wide range of health problems, including 
asthma, and respiratory and cardiovascular disease.  
5.  I have concerns about the impacts of the pollution from 
the plant on my health and the health of my family.  On 
some days, because the pollution in the area causes hazy 
conditions, I cannot see the mountains from my house.  On 
these days, I will turn on my air filters and close my 
windows to limit my exposure.  
6.  I understand that the Pu ʻunene plant supplies power to 
the Maui Electric Company . . . , and that the Commission 
is considering approving a new power purchase agreement 
with the plant.  I am concerned that the plant burns more 
coal and produces more air pollution in order to meet its 
obligations to supply power [t o Maui Electric] . 
7.  If the Commission decided not to approve the new power 
purchase agreement, it might decrease coal -burning at 
Puʻunene, and therefore decrease some of my concerns about 
the pollution from the plant.  I would feel more 
comfortable about  seeing the plume from the plant if I knew 
that they were not burning coal, or if they were burning 
less coal at the plant.  It would increase my enjoyment of 
the area and produce other benefits to my long -term health 
and well -being. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 8   The other affidavit attached to Sierra Club’s motion 
was by Wailuku resident Christine Andrews, who also expressed 
concerns regarding the coal burning at the Pu ʻunene
 Plant and the 
potential impact of the coal burning on her long-term health.  
The Andrews affidavit referenced  violations of limits on 
emissions by HC&S as follows: 
I understand that the Department of Health issued the 
Puʻunene plant a Notice of Violation in 2014 and a million 
dollar fine regarding its emissions of opacity.  I 
understand that opacity is a measure of particulate matter 
pollution.  I have concerns about the impacts of the 
pollution from the plant on my health and the health of my 
family.  I do not want to be exposed to levels of air 
pollution which exceed the levels permitted by law.  I am 
especially concerned about my exposure to [the] plant’s 
particulate mat
ter emissions (including the toxic 
substances that may be contained in particulate matter) 
because I know particulate matter can penetrate deep into 
the lungs and can lead to a range of respiratory problems.  
  Maui Electric filed a memorandum in opposition to 
Sierra Club’s motion for intervention  or participation 
asserting, inter alia, that Sierra Club failed to establish a 
right to participate in a hearing.  Maui Electric ’s memorandum 
did not address Sierra Club’s assertion of a right to a due 
process hearing and solely argu ed that Sierra Club failed to 
establish a statutory right to participate in the proceeding.  
  The Commission denied Sierra Club’s motion to 
intervene or to participate without considering Sierra Club’s 
due process assertion.  The Commission concluded that Sierra 
Club did not have an interest distinct from the general public 
and that “its interests in environmental issues and impacts ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 9 could unreasonably broaden the issues already presented.”  The 
Commission further concluded that the questions and concerns of 
Sierra Club “fall outside the narrow issues present in the 
Application, which concern the pricing structure and purchase 
obligations” of Maui Electric and HC&S.  The Commission also 
found that Sierra Club’s involvement in other energy p roceedings 
indicated that there were sufficient other means for Sierra Club 
to protect its interests. 
  Sierra Club subsequently filed a motion with the 
Commission requesting reconsideration of the order denying its  
motion to intervene or participate in the proceeding .  Sierra 
Club again asserted a due process right to participate in a 
contested case hearing related to the Application based on the 
constitutionally-protected environmental rights of the 
organization and its members.  Sierra Club cited to Pele Defense 
Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 77 Hawai ʻi 64, 881 P.2d 1210 
(1994), in support of its argument that a due process hearing 
was constitutionally required.  Sierra Club also asserted that 
the “present proceeding” was required under HRS § 269-27.2(c).  
  In denying Sierra Club’s motion for reconsideration, 
the Commission determined that Sierra Club failed to justify 
intervention or participation in the proceeding.  With regard to 
Sierra Club’s due process argument, the Commission determined 
that Pele Defense Fund  was inapplicable.  The Commission did not ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 10 otherwise address Sierra Club’s assertion of a due process right 
8to participate in a hearing concerning its environmental rights.  
  The Commission issued its final Decision and Order 
concerning the Application on September 24, 2015.  In its 
Decision and Order, the Commission granted the Application to 
approve the Agreement.  Among its findings and conclusions, the 
Commission observed that the Agreement is “anticipated to help 
accomplish the State’s policy goals of reaching 100% renewable 
energy by 2045 as well as increasing the State’s energy self -
sufficiency.”  Additionally, the Commission approved Maui 
Electric’s request  to file confidentially fuel information 
provided by HC&S, which includes the type of  fuels burned by 
HC&S.  T he PUC determined that the information was proprietary 
and “if disclosed publicly could d isadvanta ge and competitively 
harm HC&S.”  
  Sierra Club appealed to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA) challenging the Commission’s order denying its 
motion to intervene or participate in the proceedings and Sierra 
Club’s motion for reconsideration.  Both the Commission and Maui 
Electric contested the jurisdiction of the ICA, arguing that the 
                                                        
 8 The Division of Consumer Advocacy took no position with respect 
to Sierra Club’s motion for intervention or with regard to the motion for 
reconsideration.  In its Statement of Position as to the Agreement, the 
Consumer Advocate recommended approval of the Agreement subject to various 
conditions. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 11 ICA lacked jurisdiction because the appeal did not arise from a 
contested case.  Maui Electric filed a motion to dismiss the 
appeal, asserting that the appeal should be dismissed for lack 
of jurisdiction because the motion to intervene was not a 
contested case proceeding.  
Maui Electric asserted that Sierra 
Club’s concern regarding “the public health and visibility 
impacts of burning coal” did not rise to the level of property 
within the meaning of the due process clause.  Maui Electric 
also argued that, as a factual matter, the Commission’s approval 
of the Application would not increase the amount of electricity 
generated using coal at the Pu ʻunene Plant. 
  In its statement of jurisdiction and memorandum in 
opposition to Maui Electric ’s motion to dismiss , Sierra Club 
asserted that a hearing regarding the Application was required 
pursuant to HRS § 269 -27.2(d), HRS § 269- 16(b), and by due 
process to protect the right to a clean and healthful 
environment. 
  The ICA granted Maui Electric ’s motion to dismiss 
Sierra Club’s appeal, concluding that the Commission was not 
required to hold a hearing on the Application, and thus, the ICA 
determined, Sierra Club was not “a person aggrieved in a 
contested case proceeding” under  HRS § 269- 15.5.  Accordingly, 
the ICA concluded that it was without appellate jurisdiction to 
consider Sierra Club’s appeal.  The ICA relied on  In re Tawhiri  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 12 Power LLC, 126 Hawai ʻi 242, 245 -46, 269 P.3d 777, 780-81 (App. 
2012), in noting that appellate jurisdiction does not exist over 
appeals based on  a Commission order denying a motion to 
9intervene.
  Sierra Club subsequently filed an application for a 
writ of certiorari to  this court, which was  granted. 
II. DISCUSSION  
A. Mootness   
  Maui Electric asserts that this case should be 
dismissed in light of the recent closing of the Pu ʻunene Plant.  
However, to the extent Sierra Club’s claim is moot,  it falls 
within the public interest exception to the mootness doctrine.  
This court reviews three factors in analyzing the public 
interest exception: “ (1) the public or private nature of the 
question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) 
the likelihood of future recurrence o f the question.”  Cty. of 
Haw. v. Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 Hawai ʻi 391, 405, 
235 P.3d 1103, 
1117 (2010) (quoting Doe v. Doe, 116 Hawai ʻi 323, 327, 172 P.3d 
1067, 1071 (2007)). 
                                                        
 9 The ICA also cited to In re T- Mobile West Corp. , No. CAAP -12-
0001117, 2013 WL 1501028 (App. Apr . 11, 2013) (order granting motion to 
dismiss appeal), and In re Coral Wireless , No. CAAP -12-0001119, 2013 WL 
1729717 (App. Apr. 22, 2013) (order dismissing appeal).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 13   The issue in this case is whether, given the 
circumstances presented, due process under the Hawai i 
Constitution provides procedural protections to persons 
asserting the constitutional right to a clean and healthful 
environment.  Resolution of the issue may affect similarly 
situated parties who in the future seek to assert their right to 
a clean and healthful environment in proceedings before agencie s 
and other governmental bodies.  Ala 
Loop, 123 Hawai i at 405, 235 
P.3d at 1117 (“[T]he ICA’s ruling that there is no private right 
of action under chapter 205 ‘inject[ed] the requisite degree of 
public concern ’ in support of having the public interest 
exception apply. ” (quoting Doe, 116 Hawai i at 327, 172 P.2d at 
1071)); Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem , 119 Hawai i  1, 7, 193 
P.3d 839, 845 (2008) (noting that “the public interest exception 
has focused largely on political or legislative issues that 
affect a significant number of Hawai i residents”); Kaho ohanohano  
v. State, 114 Hawai i 302, 333, 162 P.3d 696, 727 (2007) (holding 
that the question in the case was of a public nature because the 
outcome would affect all state and county employees); Doe, 116 
Hawaii at 327, 172 P.3d at 1071  (constitutionality of a 
grandparent visitation statute was of a public nature). 
  Resolution of the issue presented in this case is also 
desirable because it will guide public officers, especially ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 14 those working for agencies that exercise quasi- adjudicative 
authority, as to the manner in which due process and the right 
to a clean and healthful environment interact and as to the 
procedural safeguards that may be applicable when these two 
constitutional rights converge.  See Ala Loop , 123 Hawai i at 
405, 235 P.3d at 1117 (reasoning that “because the availabil ity 
of private enforcement is a potentially important consideration 
for public officers to take into account in performing their own 
duties under HRS chapter 205, public officials need guidance 
with regard to whether private citizens have a private right of 
action to enforce HRS cha pter 205”); Kahoohanohano , 114 Hawai i 
at 333—34, 162 P.3d at 727 –28 (noting that “determination of the 
matter would assist public officers in the future” because it 
“will assist executive officers and legislators in making 
budgetary decisions involving the benefits of public 
employees”).  Providing guidance in this  area is desirable 
because it will clarify to public officers that they have the 
duty to properly consider and effectuate safeguards that the 
Hawaii Constitution provides in the context of agency 
proceedings.  See Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. 
Res., 136 Hawai i 376, 414, 363 P.3d 224, 262 (2015) (Pollack, 
J., concurring) (a majority of the court holding that “an agency ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 15 . . . must perform its statutory function in a manner that 
fulfills the State ’s affirmative constitutional obligations”).  
  Finally, given that agencies are “often in the 
position of deciding issues that affect multiple stakeholders 
and implicate constitutional rights and duties,”  Mauna Kea  
Anaina Hou , 136 Hawai i at 413–14, 363 P.3d at 261–62, it is 
likely that the constitutional right to a clean and healthful 
environment will be asserted or  will arise under agency 
proceedings in the future.  Thus, the question that we resolve 
in this case is likely to recur in the future.  See Ala Loop , 
123 Hawai i at 405–06, 235 P. 3d at 1117–18 (reasoning that “given 
the volume of land development activity in the State and the 
frequency with which issues relating to chapter 205 have been 
litigated, the question regarding whether a private party may 
seek to enforce HRS chapter 205 is likely to recur in the 
future”); Kaleikini v. Thielen , 124 Hawai i 1, 13, 237 P.3d 1067,  
1079 (2010) (explaining that “the likelihood of future 
recurrence of the question seems high inasmuch as it seems 
probable that iwi will continue to be unearthed at future 
construction projects”).   Accordingly, this case satisfies the 
three prongs of the public interest exception to the mootness 
doctrine, and we proceed to address the merits of this case. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 16 B. Appellate Jurisdiction  
  Commission decisions are appealable to the ICA 
10pursuant to HRS § 269- 15.5.   “Only a person aggrieved in a 
contested case proceeding . . . may appeal from the order, if 
the order is final, or if preliminary, is of the nature defined 
by section 91- 14(a).”  Id.  Judicial review over an agency 
appeal is authorized by HRS § 91-14 when the following 
requirements have been met: 
first, the proceeding that resulted in the unfavorable 
agency action must have been a contested case hearing . . . 
; second, the agency’s action must represent a final 
decision or order, or a preliminary ruling such that 
deferral of review would deprive the claimant of adequate 
relief; third, the claimant must have followed the 
applicable agency rules and, therefore, have been involved 
in the contested case; and finally, the claimant’s legal 
interests must have been injured--i.e., the claimant must 
have standing to appeal.  
Kilakila ʻ O Haleakala v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 131 Hawai ʻi 
193, 200, 317 P.3d 27, 34 (2013) (quoting Kaleikini v. Thielen , 
124 Hawai ʻ11i 1, 16-17, 237 P.3d 1067, 1082-83  (2010)).   In other 
                                                        
 10 HRS § 269 -15.5 provides , inter alia, as follows:  
An appeal from an order of the public utilities commission 
under this chapter shall lie, subject to chapter 602, in 
the manner provided for civil appeals from the circuit 
courts.  Only a person aggrieved in a contested case 
proceeding provided for in this chapter may appeal from the 
order, if the order is final, or if preliminary, is of the 
nature defined by section 91 -14(a). 
HRS § 269- 15.5 (2007).  
 11 HRS § 91- 14(a) provides,  
Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in a 
contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 17 words, there are four requirements for judicial review over an 
agency appeal: a contested case hearing, finality, compliance 
with agency rule, and standing.  As the decision was final and 
Sierra Club complied with applicable agency rules, we consider 
whether there was a contested case and 
whether Sierra Club has 
12standing to appeal.
 
1. The Proceeding Was a Contested Case  
  A contested case hearing is one that is (1) “required 
by law” and (2) determines “the rights, duties, and privileges 
of specific parties.”  Kilakila ʻ O Haleakala , 131 Hawaiʻi at 200, 
317 P.3d at 34 (quoting Kaleikini , 124 Hawai ʻi at 16–17, 237 P.3d 
at 1082–83).  Accordingly, we address whether a hearing was 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
that deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final 
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is  
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter; but 
nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent resort 
to other means of review, redress, relief, or trial de 
novo, including the right of trial by jury, provided by 
law.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter 
to the contrary, for the purposes of this section, the term 
“person aggrieved” shall include an agency that is a party 
to a contested case proceeding before that agency or 
another agency.  
HRS § 91- 14(a) (2012).  
 12 We note that the standing requirement to challenge an agency 
action is distinct from the procedural right to do so.  As explained in 
County of Hawai i v. Ala Loop Homeowners , “[t]he private right of action 
inquiry focuses on the question of whether any private party can sue . . . 
while the standing inquiry focuses on whether a particular  private party is 
an appropriate plaintiff.”  123 Hawai i 391, 406 n.20, 235 P.3d 1103, 1118 
n.20 (2010).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 18 required by law and, if required, whether such a hearing would 
have determined the rights, duties, and privileges of specific 
parties. 
  “In order for an administrative agency hearing to be 
‘required by law, it may be required by (1) agency rule, (2) 
statute, or (3) constitutional due process. ’”  Id. (quoting 
Kaleikini, 124 Hawai ʻi at 16–
17, 237 P.3d at 1082 –83).  Sierra 
Club asserts that a hearing was required in this matter under 
13 14HRS § 269-27.2(d);  HRS § 269-16(b);  and under the due process 
clause of article I, section 5 of the Hawai ʻ15i Constitution.  
                                                        
 13 HRS § 269 -27.2(d) (2007) provides the following in relevant part:  
Upon application of a public utility that supplies 
electricity to the public, and notification of its 
customers, the commission, after an evidentiary hearing, 
may allow payments made by the public utility to nonfossil 
fuel producers for firm capacity and related revenue taxes 
to be recovered by the public utility through an interim 
increase in rates until the effective date of the rate 
change approved by the commission’s final decision in the 
public utility’s next general rate proceeding under section 
269-16 . . . . 
 14 HRS § 269 -16(b) (Supp. 2016) provides the following in relevant 
part: 
No rate, fare, charge, classification, schedule, rule, or 
practice, other than one established pursuant to an 
automatic rate adjustment clause previously approved by the 
commission, shall be established, abandoned, modified, or 
departed from by any public utility, except after thirty 
days’ notice to the commission as prescribed in section 
269
-12(b), and prior approval by the commission for any 
increases in rates, fares, or  charges.  The commission, in 
its discretion and for good cause shown, may allow any 
rate, fare, charge, classification, schedule, rule, or 
practice to be established, abandoned, modified, or 
departed from upon notice less than that provided for in 
section 269-12(b).  A contested case hearing shall be held 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 19 a. HRS § 269-27.2(d) 
  Sierra Club has not established that a hearing was 
required under HRS § 269- 27.2(d).  HRS § 269- 27(d) provides that 
the Commission may allow a public utility to impose an interim 
increase in rates to recover payments made to “nonfossil fuel 
[16
]producers for firm capacity  and related revenue taxes”  after 
17an evidentiary hearing.
  HRS § 269-27(d) (emphasis added).   
Sierra Club has not argued  that the Commission’s decision 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
in connection with any increase in rates, and the hearing 
shall be preceded by a public hearing as prescribed in 
section 269 -12(c), at which the consumers or patrons of the 
public utility may present testimony to the commission 
concerning the increase.  
 15 Based upon the cases cited by Sierra Club referencing the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution, we assume that when Sierra Club references the requirements of 
“due process,” it is to invoke the due process protections of  the 
Constitution of the State of Hawai ʻi.  Article I, section 5 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution provides the following:  
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property 
without due process of law, nor be denied the equal 
protection of the laws, nor be denied the enjoyment of the 
person’s civil rights or be discriminated against in the 
exercise thereof because of race, religion, sex or 
ancestry.  
 16 “‘Firm capacity’ means the scheduled amounts of capacity in 
kilowatts (kw) which a qualifying facility has a legally enforceable 
obligation to make available to an electric utility under utility dispatch 
within particular time periods, and which the electric utility agrees to 
accept.”  HAR § 6- 74-1 (1998).  
 17 See also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1959, in 1988 Senate Journal, 
at 861 (“Under current law and practice, electric utilities are not permitted 
to recover firm capacity payments actually being made to non -utility energy 
producers until the electric utility’s next rate case.  This bill would 
provide the PUC the discretion to allow the electric utility to recover the 
firm capacity payments on an interim basis until the electric utility’s next 
rate case.”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 20 authorized Maui Electric to impose an interim increase in rates 
for the purpose of recovering payments for firm capacity, nor 
has Sierra Club argued that Maui Electric ever sought permission 
to do so.  Indeed, the record indicates that one of the features 
of the Agreement was to eliminate the capacity payments that 
18Maui Electric was paying to HC&S under the existing agreement.   
Accordingly, the requirement of a hearing provided for in HRS § 
269-27(d) is not applicable to the Application in this case.  
b. HRS § 269-16(b)  
  Sierra Club also failed to demonstrate that a hearing 
was required under HRS § 269- 16(b).  HRS § 269 -16(b) requires 
the Commission to conduct a contested case hearing whenever a 
utility seeks an increase in rates.  This provision specifically 
exempts fee adjustments “established pursuant to an  automatic 
19rate adjustment clause previously approved by the commission.”   
HRS § 269-16(b).  In this case, the Commission authorized Maui 
Electric to recover charges for purchased energy  under the 
Agreement through Maui Electric’s existing energy cost 
                                                        
 18 It is noted that the nonexistence of a “firm capacity” provision 
in an agreement is not dispositive of  whether a public utility seeks to 
recover such payments through an increase in rates.  
 19 A “fuel adjustment clause” is defined as “a provision of a rate 
schedule which provides for increases or decreases or both, without prior 
hearing, in rates reflecting  increases or decreases or both in costs incurred 
by an electric or gas utility for fuel and purchased energy due to changes in 
the unit cost of fuel and purchased energy.”  HAR § 6 -60-6. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 21 20adjustment clause.   There is nothing in the record indicating 
that Maui Electric ’s energy cost adjustment clause was not 
previously approved by the Commission or that the Commission’s 
decision revised the existing adjustment clause.   Additionally, 
the record does not suggest that the use of the fuel adjustment 
clause in this case would cover anything other than increases or 
decreases in the unit cost of purchased energy determined by the 
last rate case proceeding for the utility.  See HAR § 6- 60-6(3).  
Accordingly, Sierra Club has not established that a ratemaking 
hearing was required under HRS § 269- 16(b) before the Commission 
could approve Maui Electric ’s request to recover the purchased 
energy costs through its existing energy cost adjustment clause.  
c. Due Process  
i. Property Interests  
  We next consider whether Sierra Club was entitled to a 
hearing pursuant to the Hawaiʻ i Constitution’s due process 
protections.  We have long recognized that “[c] onstitutional due 
process protections mandate a hearing whenever the claimant 
seeks to protect a ‘property interest,’ in other words, a 
benefit to which the claimant is legitimately entitled.”  Pele 
Def. Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 77 Hawaiʻ i 64, 68, 881 P.2d 
                                                        
 20 The Agreement defined “Energy Cost Adjustment Clause” as, “The 
provision in Maui Electric’s rate schedules that allows Maui Electric to pass 
through to its customers Maui Electric’s cost  of fuel and purchased power.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 22 1210, 1214 (1994).  We apply a two- step analysis to claims of a 
due process right to a hearing : “(1) is the particular interest 
which claimant seeks to protect by a hearing ‘property’  within 
the meaning of the due process clauses of the federal and state 
constitutions, and (2) if the interest is ‘property,’  what 
specific procedu res are required to protect it.”  Sandy Beach 
Def. Fund v. City Council of Honolulu , 70 Haw. 361, 376, 773 
P.2d 250, 260 (1989) (citing Aguiar v. Haw. Hous. Auth. , 55 Haw. 
478, 495, 522 P.2d 1255, 1266 (1974)).  Accordingly, in order 
for procedural due process protections to apply, Sierra Club 
“must possess an interest which qualifies as ‘property’ within 
the meaning of the constitution.”  Id.  “These interests--
property interests--may take many forms” because courts have 
long recognized that “property interests protected by procedural 
due process extend well beyond actual ownership of real estate, 
chattels, or money.”  Bd. of Regents v. Roth , 408 U.S. 564, 571-
72, 576 (1972).  A property interest does not need to be 
“tangible” to be protected by the due process clause.  Rather, a 
protected property interest exists in a benefit--tangible or 
otherwise--to which a party has “a legitimate claim of 
entitlement.”  Sandy Beach Def. Fund , 70 Haw. at 377; 773 P.2d 
at 260 (quoting Roth, 408 U.S. at 577); see also Alejado v. City  
& Cty. of Honolulu , 89 Hawaiʻ i 221, 227, 971 P.2d 310, 316 (App. 
1998).  We have thus recognized protected property interests in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 23 a range of intangible entitlements, including driving 
privileges, Kernan v. Tanaka , 75 Haw. 1, 22, 856 P.2d 1207, 1218
(1993), and the continued practice of medicine at a publicly 
funded hospital, Silver v. Castle Mem ’l Hosp. , 53 Haw. 475, 486,
497 P.2d 564, 572 (1972).   
 
  The legitimate claims of entitlement that constitute 
property interests are not created by the due process clause 
itself.  Instead, “they are created and their dimensions are 
defined by existing rules or understanding that stem from an 
independent source such as state law-- rules or understanding 
that secure certain benefits and that support claims of 
entitlement to those benefits.”  In re ʻĪao
 Ground Water Mgmt. 
Area High-Level Source Water Use Permit Applications , 128 Hawai ʻi 
228, 241, 287 P.3d 129, 142 (2012) [hereinafter ʻĪao] (quoting 
Int’l Broth. of Painters & Allied Trades v. Befitel , 104 Hawai ʻi 
275, 283, 88 P.3d 647, 655 (2004)).  
  In ʻ Īao, for example, we held that Native Hawaiian 
water rights constituted “‘property interests’ for the purpose 
of due process analysis. ”  Id. at 241-44, 287 P.3d at 142-45.  
The ʻĪao court rejected the argument that Native Hawaiian 
practices are similar to general “‘ aesthetic and environmental 
interests’  which the court has held to be insufficient to 
establish a property interest” because those  affected had a 
genuine interest in the water at issue and there was  independent ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 24 legal authority to support the asserted property interest.  Id. 
at 242, 287 P.3d at 143. 
  Similar to the Native Hawaiian water rights asserted 
in ʻĪao, Sierra Cl ub’s asserted  property interest is defined by 
State constitutional and statutory law.  “The right to a clean 
and healthful environment”  is a substantive right guaranteed to 
each person by article XI, section 9 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution:  
Each person has the right to a  clean and healthful 
environment, as defined by laws relating to environmental 
quality, including control of pollution and conservation, 
protection and enhancement of natural resources.  
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 9; see also Cty. of Haw. v. Ala Loop 
Homeowners , 123 Hawai ʻi 391, 409,  417, 235 P.3d 1103, 1121, 1127  
(2010) (recognizing a substantive right to a clean and healthful 
environment).  Article XI, section 9 is self-executing, and it 
“establishes the right to a cl ean and healthful environment, ‘ as 
21defined by laws rel ating to environmental quality.’”   Ala Loop , 
123 Hawai ʻi at 417, 235 P.3d at 1127.  This substantive right is 
a legitimate entitlement stemming from and shaped by independent 
                                                        
 21 In addition to the substantive right to a clean and healthful 
environment, article XI, section 9 also  includes a private right of 
enforcement of the right to a clean and healthful environment.  See Haw. 
Const. art. XI, § 9 (“Any person may enforce this right against any party, 
public or private, through appropriate legal proceedings, subject to 
reasonable
 limitations and regulation as provided by law.”); Ala Loop , 123 
Hawaiʻi at 409, 235 P.3d at 1121 (distinguishing between the substantive right 
and procedural component of article XI, section 9).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 25 sources of state law, and is thus a property interest protected 
by due process. 
  Although a  person’s right to a clean and healthful 
environment is vested pursuant to article XI, section 9, the 
right is defined by existing law relating to environmental 
quality.  A committee report from the 1978 Constitutional 
Convention explained that the right would be defined by 
environmental statutes, rules, and ordinances to lend 
flexibility to the definition of the right over time:  
Your Committee believes that a clean and healthful 
environment is an important right of every citizen and that  
this right deserves constitutional protection .  The 
definition of this right would be accomplished by relying 
on the large body of statutes, administrative rules and 
ordinances relating to environmental  quality.  Defining the 
right in terms of present laws imposes no new legal duties 
on parties, a point of fairness important to parties which 
have invested or are investing large sums of money to 
comply with present laws.  
Developing a body of case law defining the content of the 
right could involve confusion and inconsistencies.  On the 
other hand, legislatures, county councils and 
administrative agencies can adopt, modify or repeal 
environmental laws or regulation laws [sic] in light of the 
latest scientific evidence and federal requirements and 
opportunities.  Thus, the right can be reshaped and 
redefined through statute, ordinance and administrative 
rule-making procedures and not inflexibly fixed . 
Ala Loop , 123 Hawai i at 409 n.24, 235 P.3d at 1121 n.24 
(emphases added) (quoting Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaiʻ i 1978, at 
689).  Accordingly, the parameters of the property interest 
asserted by Sierra Club under article XI, section 9 is defined 
in reference to laws related to environmental quality .  See id. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 26   Sierra Club has asserted a right to a clean and 
healthful environment in this case as defined by HRS Chapter 
269, which includes the duties and operation of the Commission 
in regulating public utilities.  Thus, we next consider whether 
Chapter 269 is a law relating to environmental quality within 
the meaning of article XI, section 9.  HRS § 269-6 pertains to 
the general powers and duties of the Commission and  prescribes 
that the Commission “shall consider the need to reduce the 
State’s reliance on fossil fuels through energy efficiency and 
increased renewable energy generation.”  HRS § 269 -6(b) (Supp. 
222013).
  This statutory provision also provides  that in its 
decision-making, the Commission “ shall explicitly consid er” the 
effect of the State’s reliance on fossil fuels on the level of 
“greenhouse gas emissions.”  Id.  Indeed, dating back as far as 
1977, when the legislature adopted HRS § 269-27.2 concerning the 
                                                        
 22 HRS § 269 -6(b) provides the following:  
The public utilities commission shall consider the need to 
reduce the State’s reliance on fossil fuels through energy 
efficiency and increased renewable energy generation in 
exercising its authority and duties under this chapter.  In 
making determinations of the reasonableness of the costs of 
utility system capital improvements and operations, the 
commission shall explicitly consider, quantitatively or 
qualitatively, the effect of the State’s reliance on fossil 
fuels on price volatility, export of funds for fuel 
imports, fuel supply reliability risk, and greenhouse gas 
emissions.  The commission may determine that short -term 
costs or direct costs that are higher than alternatives 
relying more heavily on fossil fuels are reasonable, 
considering the impacts resulting from the use of fossil 
fuels. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 27 utilization of electricity generated from nonfossil fuels, the 
legislature has repeatedly communicated its intent that the 
Commission is to reduce the State’s dependence on fossil fuels 
and utilize renewable energy sources.  This intent is manifest 
in the legislative history of Chapter 269, which unequivocally 
demonstrates an established State policy of prioritizing the 
utilization of renewable energy sources to reduce pollution in 
addition to securing the potential economic
 benefits and 
enhanced reliability of the
 State’s energy supply .   
  HRS § 269-6(b) was permissive when first enacted in 
2007: “The public utilities commission may consider the need for 
increased renewable energy use in exercising its authority and 
duties under this chapter.”  2007 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 177, § 2 
at 346.  The 2007 act noted that “[p]rogressive energy policy -
making at the state level [was] one of the most important issues 
on the [2007] legislative agenda.”  Id. § 1 at 345- 46.  One of 
the purposes of the 2007 legislation was to authorize the 
Commission “to consider the need for inc reased renewable energy 
use in exercising its authority and dut ies” under Chapter 269.  
Id.  This addition to Chapter 269 was unsurprising given the 
legislature’s establishment of rene wable portfolio standards in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 28 232001.   The renewable portfolio standards clarify what qualifies 
24as renewable energy.   In further clarifying what qualified as 
renewable energy in 2004, the legislature found that “the State 
should be a strategic partner with the private sector in 
developing these renewable energy resources, and that the 
State’s willingness and intent to provide relevant and 
meaningful support for this endeavor should be embedded into 
public policy.”  2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 95, § 1 at 384.  
  In 2011, the legislature amended HRS § 269 -6(b) to 
make it mandatory for the Commission when exercising its duties 
to recognize the “need” to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and 
to “explicitly consider ” the levels and effect of greenhouse gas 
emissions:  
(b) The public utilities commission [ may] shall consider 
the need [ for] to reduce the State’s reliance on fossil 
fuels through energy efficiency and  increased renewable 
energy [use ] generation
 in exercising its authority and 
duties under this chapter.  In making determinations of the 
reasonableness of the costs of utility system capital 
improvements and operations, the commission shall 
explicitly consider, quantitatively or qualitatively, the 
effect of the State’s reliance on fossil fuels on price 
volatility, export of funds for fuel imports, fuel supply 
reliability risk, and  greenhouse gas emissions.  The 
commission may determine that short term costs or direct 
costs that are higher than alternatives relying more 
heavily on fossil fuels are reasonable, considering the 
impacts resulting from the use of fossil fuels.  
                                                        
 23 Act 272 (June 25, 2001) (adopting renewable portfolio standards 
and noting the “intent of the legislature to recognize the economic, 
environmental, and fuel diversity benefits of renewable energy resources”).   
 24 See HRS §§ 269 -91, 269- 92. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 29 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 109, § 1 at 287-88 (repealed statutory 
material bracketed and stricken, and new statutory material 
underscored).  The House Committee on Energy and Environmental 
Protection made the following finding with respect to the 2011 
amendment:  
Your Committee finds that Hawaii is dangerously reliant on 
imported fossil fuel , which subjects the State and 
residents to  greater oil and gas price volatility, 
increased air pollution, and potentially harmful climate 
change due to the release of harmful g
reenhouse gases .  
Your Committee further finds that these adverse conditions 
carry with them hidden costs that are not always considered 
by the Public Utilities Commission when the Commission 
makes decisions regarding utility system capital 
improvements and operations.  This measure will assist in 
reducing the State’s reliance on fossil fuels by requiring 
the Commission to factor in the hidden and long -term costs 
of the State’s detrimental reliance on fossil fuels when 
exercising its statutory authority.  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1004, in 2011 House Journal, at 1332 
(emphases added).  Thus, a primary purpose of the amended law 
was to require the Commission to consider the hidden and long-
term costs of reliance on fossil fuels, which subjects the State 
and its residents to “increased air pollution”  and “potentially 
harmful climate change due to the release of harmful greenhouse 
gases.”  Id. 
  HRS  § 269-6(b)’s requirement to reduce reliance on 
fossil fuels and to consider greenhouse gas emissions applies to 
the fulfillment of all of the Commission’s duties.  See HRS § 
269-6(b).  Chapter 269 also includes HRS § 269-27.2, concerning 
the utilization of electricity generated from nonfossil fuels, 
and Part V, prescribing
 renewable portfolio standards.  These ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 30 regulations would appear to be precisely the type of “laws 
relating to environmental quality” that article XI, section 9
references.  
  The dissent presents  three interrelated arguments that 
Sierra Club does not possess a protected interest  in a clean and 
25healthful environment as defined by HRS Chapter 269.   First, 
the dissent contends that HRS § 269 -6, HRS § 269 -27.2, and Part 
V of HRS Chapter 269 do not “provide Sierra Club’s Members or 
others with a protected property interest .”  Dissent  at 13.  
Second, the dissent argues that article XI, section 9 of the 
Hawaii Constitution does not create a property interest.  
Dissent at 15.  Lastly, the dissent contends that HRS Chapter 
269 does not describe property interests and appears to reason, 
therefore, that the chapter cannot define the contours of the 
property interest created by article XI, section 9.  Dissent at 
13, 16. 
  The dissent’s initial argument that HRS Chapter 269 
does not “provide”  anyone “with a  protected property interest ” 
misapprehends the source of Sierra Club’s protected  interest in 
                                                        
 25 Notwithstanding the dissent’s claim that article XI, section 9 
does not create a protected interest, the dissent also suggests that the 
private declaratory action that article XI, section 9 authorizes is the 
exclusive procedural mechanism for protecting the interest the provision 
creates.  Dissent at 17 -18.  The procedural measures our Constitution affords 
to protect against the wrongful deprivation of an interest are a wholly 
separate question from whether a protected interest exists in the first 
instance.  We therefore address this contention infra when considering the 
procedural protections Sierra Club is due.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 31 a clean and healthful environment.  It is not necessary for HRS 
Chapter 269 to create  a property interest because article XI, 
section 9 has already done so, as explained next with regard to 
th
e dissent’s second contention .  
   The dissent’s second argument that a rticle XI, 
section 9 of the Hawai i Constitution does not create a protected 
property interest is plainly contradicted by the history of our 
Constitution and this court ’s own precedent.  The Standing 
Committee Report from the 1978 Constitutional Convention 
specifically observed that “a clean and healthful environment is 
an important right of every citizen  
and that this right deserves 
constitutional protection.”  Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai i of 1978, 
at 689 (emphasis added).  And the resolution adopting the 
amendment stated that the provision “ gives each person the right 
to a clean and healthful environment as defined by law.”  Res. 
30, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawai i 
of 1978, at 543-44.  Indeed, we expressly recognized in Ala Loop  
that article XI, section 9 “ recognizes a substantive right. ”  
123 Hawai i at 409, 235 P.3d at 1121 (emphasis added).   
  The dissent,  in contending that section 9 does not 
create a protected property interest,  also appears to 
differentiate substantive rights from property interests by ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 32 arguing that Ala Loop  “did not indicate that plainti ffs had a 
property interest.”  Dissent at 15.  The distinction is 
unfounded.  As stated, a property interest exists wherever there 
is a “legitimate claim of entitlement” that “stem[s] from an 
independent source such as state law--rules or understandings 
that secure certain benefits.”  Īao, 128 Hawai i at 241, 287 P.3d 
at 142 (quoting Int’l Broth. of Painters , 104 Hawai i at 283, 88 
P.3d at 655).  Thus, where a source of state law-- such as 
article XI, section 9-- grants any party a substantive right to a 
benefit--such as a clean and healthful environment--that party 
gains a legitimate entitlement to that benefit as defined by 
state law, and a property interest protected by due process is 
created.  In other words, the substantive component of article 
XI, section 9 that we recognized in Ala Loop  is a protectable 
26property interest under our precedents.  
  Lastly, the dissent contends  that “[u]nlike the 
statutes in Īao which described Native Hawaiian s’ entitlement  to 
water,” HRS Chapter 269 does not “ describe[] . . . property 
interests” that “establish the content of the substantive right 
to a clean and healthful environment.”  Dissent at 16.   Article 
                                                        
 26 Indeed, by acknowledging that article XI, section 9 provides 
Sierra Club with the procedural right to bring a private  declaratory action 
to enforce HRS Chapter 269, Dissent at 17 -18, the dissent also implicitly 
acknowledges that there is a substantive right--and thus a property interest -
-that would be vindicated through such a private action.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 33 XI, section 9, however, expressly defines the contours of “a 
clean and healthful environment” through “laws relating to 
environmental quality, including control of pollution and 
conservation, protection and enhancement of natural resources.”   
That is, the property interest created by article XI, section 9 
is shaped by all state laws relating to environmental quality.  
See Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawai i of 1978, at 689  (“The 
definition of this right [to a clean and healthful environment] 
would be accomplished by relying on the large body of statutes, 
administrative rules and ordinances relating to environmental 
quality.” ).  Article XI, section 9 thus guarantees to “[e]ach 
person” an individual, private right to share in the benefit of 
environmental laws-- regardless of whether the regulation 
27describes a “ta ngible property interest.”  
  Additionally, the dissent mis characterizes the 
property rights at issue in  Īao as being specifically provided 
for by statute.  Dissent at 16.  However, the provisions of the 
water code relating to Native Hawaiian water rights that we 
considered were styled as savings clauses , stating that the 
                                                        
 27 It is noted that such environmental laws may be enacted pursuant 
to article IX, section 8, which empowers the State to pass environmental 
regulations “to promote and maintain a healthful environment.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 34 water code was not intended to abridge rights already in 
28existence.   The water rights were derived from other sources of 
law, including traditional practices and article XII, section 7 
of our Constitution, which guarantees “all rights, customarily 
and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural and 
religious purposes and possessed by ahupua a tenants who are 
descendants of native Hawaiians.”  See ʻĪao, 128 Hawai ʻi at 263, 
287 P.3d at 164 (Acoba, J., concurring).  Thus, the statutes at 
issue in  Īao
 specifically preserved “all rights” guaranteed by 
article XII, section 7, while in this case HRS Chapter 269 
defines the contours of the “right” of “each person  . . . to a 
clean and healthful environment ” that article XI, section 9 
guarantees.  Both statutes clarify the content of rights 
guaranteed by the respective constitutional provisions, which 
are protectable interests under the due process clause. 
  We th erefore conclude that HRS Chapter 269 is a law 
relating to environmental quality that defines the right to a 
clean and healthful environment under article XI, section 9 by 
providing that express consideration be given to reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions in the decision- making of the 
                                                        
 28 See HRS § 174C –101(c)-(d) (2012) (“Traditional and customary 
rights . . . shall not be abridged or denied by this chapter . . . . The 
appurtenant water rights . . . shall not be diminished or extinguished  . . .
under this chapter. ” (emphases added)).    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 35 Commission.  Accordingly, we hold that Sierra Club has 
established a legitimate claim of entitlement to a clean and 
healthful environment under article XI , section  9 and HRS 
Chapter 269.   
  We note that this  right is not a freestanding interest  
in general aesthetic and environmental values.  See Sandy Beach 
Def. Fund
, 70 Haw. at 376-77, 773 P.2d 
at 260-61.  The 
challengers in Sandy Beach Defense Fund  did not identify any 
source granting them a substantive legal right to enforcement of 
environmental laws.  Rather, t he asserted “property interests” 
were unilateral expectations of aesthetic value , including 
claims that a person who lived in close proximity to a proposed 
development would lose her view of the ocean and decrease the 
value of her property.  Id. at 367, 773 P.2d at 255.  In 
contrast, Sierra Club ’s right to a clean and healthful 
environment is provided for in article XI, section 9 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution and defined by HRS Chapter 269.  It is not a 
unilateral expectation on the part of Sierra Club, but rather a 
right guaranteed by the Constitution and statutes of this state. 
ii. Hearing  Procedures  
  Having determined that Sierra Club has established a 
protectable “property” interest, w e next consider what 
procedures due process requires in this cas e given the 
demonstrated property interest in a clean and healthful ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 36 environment as defined by HRS Chapter 269.  I n determining the 
procedures required to comply with constitutional due process,  
we consider the following factors: “(1) the private interest 
which will be affected; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation 
of such interest through the procedures actually used, and the 
probable value, if any, of additional or alternative procedural 
safeguards; and (3) the governmental interest, including the 
burden that additional procedural safeguards would entail .”  
Sandy Beach Def. Fund v. City Council of City & Cty. of  
Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989) ; see also 
Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 136 Hawai ʻi 376, 
410, 363 P.3d 224, 258 (2015) (Pollack, J., concurring).  We 
have held that, “as a matter of constitution al due process, an 
agency hearing is . . . required where the issuance  of a permit 
implicating an applicant’s property rights adversely affects the 
constitutionally protected rights of other interested persons 
who have followed the agency’s rules governing  participation in 
contested cases.”  Pele Def. Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 77 
Hawaiʻi 64, 68, 881 P.2d 1210,  1214 (1994).  In other words, the 
court in Pele Defense Fund  concluded that when the requirements 
of standing were met and the agency’s rules were followed, an 
agency hearing was required when the challenged State action 
“adversely affects the constitutionally protected rights” of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 37 others.  Id. (citing other subsections of the opinion addressing 
the requirements of standing and compliance with agency rules).   
  As discussed, the private interest to be affected in 
this case is the right to a clean and healthful environment, 
which is a substantive right guaranteed by the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution.  See Cty. of Haw. v. Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 
Hawaiʻ29i 391, 409, 417, 235 P.3d 1103, 1121, 1127 (2010).   This 
right to a clean and healthful environment includes the right 
that explicit consideration be given to reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions in Commission decision-making, as provided for in 
HRS Chapter 269.  In this case, Maui Electric sought approval of 
a power purchase agreement with an energy producer that relies 
on the burning of coal and petroleum in its operations and has 
been charged with violation of the State’s vis ible emissions 
30standards.   The approval of Maui Electric’s  Application not 
only involved the approval of a newly negotiated power-purchase 
agreement, but it also extended Maui Electric ’s reliance on HC&S 
for an additional three years.  The Commission was statutorily 
                                                        
 29 Thus, contrary to the dissent’s characterization, Dissent at 8, 
the protectable interest in this case for the purpose of constitutional due 
process is not the abstract aesthetic and environmental interests of Sierra 
Club’s members; it is the right to a cle an and healthful environment 
guaranteed by article XI, section 9 of the Hawai i Constitution and 
particularized by HRS Chapter 269.  This decision does not encompass all 
general environmental and aesthetic interests.  
 30 See supra notes 4 and 7.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 38 required to consider the hidden and long- term costs of the 
continued reliance on energy produced at the Pu ʻunene Plant, 
including the potential for increased air pollution as a result 
of greenhouse gas emissions.  The Commission was requested in 
the Application to consider the reasonableness of the energy 
charges and determine whether the arrangement between Maui 
Electric and HC&S was prudent and in the public interest.  A 
review of the Agreement would involve a consideration of the 
level of emissions
, and axiomatic in this analysis is the 
implied consideration of potential risks to health, as 
contemplated by the legislature when it amended HRS § 269-6(b) 
in 2011, see supra .  Indeed, the consideration of whether energy 
charges are reasonable or whether a business  arrangement is 
prudent would necessarily include an evaluation of the hidden 
and long-term costs of the activities of the Pu ʻunene Plant.  The 
Commission’s determinations of these matters would bear upon the 
level of emissions generated by the Pu ʻunene Plant , thus 
affecting Sierra Club’s members’ right to a clean and healthful 
environment as defined by HRS Chapter 269.   
  Given the issues raised by Maui Electric’s 
Application, the proceedings directly affected the right to a 
clean and healthful environment of Sierra Club’s members as 
defined by HRS Chapter 269.  This is evident,  not only from the 
issues raised in the Application, but also from the findings and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 39 conclusions of the Commission in its Decision and Order, 
granting the Application for approval of the Agreement.  For 
example, the Commission specifically concluded that the 
Agreement--under which Maui Electric would continue to purchase 
energy generated at a plant that burned fuels that included coal 
and petroleum--was “anticipated to help accomplish the State’s 
policy goals of reaching 100% renewable energy by 2045 as well 
31as increasing the State’s energy self -sufficiency.”   
Additionally, in filing its quarterly report setting forth the 
type of energy purchased, the associated payment, and the type 
of fuel burned by HC&S, the Commission allowed Maui Electric to 
32keep the fuel information confidential.   T herefore, the 
Commission’s Decision and Order specifically involved 
determinations related to the State’s renewable energy goals as 
                                                        
 31 The Commission did not provide a rationale for this conclusion, 
which is contrary to the Consumer Advocate’s position that “continued 
reliance on older thermal units that burn fossil fuels is not consistent with 
the State’s goal of 100% renewable energy by 2045.”  See supra note 4.  
 32 The Commission in its Decision and Order indicated that Maui 
Electric failed to provide an explanation as to why this information should 
be confidential but noted that Maui Electric previously took the position 
that such information is HC&S’s “confidential  and proprietary information, 
which, if disclosed publicly, could disadvantage and competitively harm” 
HC&S.  Neither the Commission nor Maui Electric explained why this 
information--which was previously not treated as confidential, proprietary 
information by Maui Electric--should be treated as such under the Agreement.  
See, e.g., Motion to Seal of Maui Electric Company, Limited Dkt. No. 2011 -
0092, Exhibit F at 19 (Sept. 6, 2013) (disclosing HC&S’s energy generation by 
source percentage while redacting other information designated as 
confidential pursuant to a protective order).  In its motion to intervene or 
to participate without intervention, Sierra Club provided this information 
for the years 2010 to 2012 as a basis for its motion.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 40 set out in HRS Chapter 269, and, by extension, the Commission ’s 
decision also involved a determination of Sierra Club’s members’ 
interest in a clean and healthful environment as defined by 
HRS 
Chapter 269.   
  Accordingly, the Commission’s approval of the 
Agreement under the terms of its Decision and Order adversely 
affected the private interests of Sierra Club’s members.   The 
risks of an erroneous deprivation are high in this case absent 
the protections provided by a contested case hearing, 
particularly in light of  the potential long-term impact on the 
air quality in the area,  the denial of Sierra Club’s motion for 
intervention or participation in the proceeding,  and the absence 
of other proceedings in which Sierra Club could have a 
meaningful opportunity to be heard concerning HC&S’s performance 
of the Agreement.  Additionally, given that the Commission is 
already statutorily required to consider the long- term effects 
of its decisions, it would not unduly burden the Commission to 
afford Sierra Club a contested case hearing  under the 
circumstances of this case.  See Mauna Kea , 136 Hawai ʻi at 390, 
363 P.3d at 238 (concluding that due process required a hearing 
“[g]iven the substantial interest of Nativ e Hawaiians in 
pursuing their cultural practices on Mauna Kea, the risk of an 
erroneous deprivation absent the protections provided by a 
contested case hearing, and the lack of undue burden on the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 41 government in affording Appellants a contested case hearing ”).  
In its order denying Sierra Club’s motion for intervention or 
participation, the Commission noted  that it allowed Sierra Club 
to participate in other energy proceedings,  which further 
indicates that affording Sierra Club a hearing regarding the 
Application’s adverse effect on its members’ right to a clean 
and healthful environment would not unduly burden the 
Commission.   
  The dissent states that “it appears that Ala Loop  
would give Sierra Club the ability to bring a separate 
declaratory judgment action alleging that the PUC failed to 
comply with its statutory duties under HRS § 269- 6” and thus 
Sierra Club would not be deprived of any recourse if it does not 
have a constitutional right to intervene.  Dissent at 17-18.  
The dissent maintains that this is a “more nuanced approach” to 
defining article XI, section 9, which would avoid an “all or 
nothing” interpretation of the provision.  Dissent at 18.  But 
it is the “nuanced ” approach of the dissent that takes the 
uncompromising position that the exclusive  procedural mechanism 
for protecting an interest derived from article XI, section 9 is 
the private declaratory action that the provision authorizes.   
Dissent at 17-18.  The dissent’s contention is not supported by 
the wording of article XI, section 9, which contains no such 
exclusivity language
, nor by the due process clause of our ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 42 Constitution, whose protections are not restricted by the right 
to pursue a declaratory action. 
  By way of analogy, in Brown v. Thompson , the State 
impounded two unattended boats and disposed of them after 
determining that they were derelict.  91 Hawai i 1, 5-7, 979 P.2d 
586, 590-92 (1999).  Just as here, there was no dispute that the 
owner of the boat had the procedural right to bring a private 
action for declaratory relief.  (Indeed, Brown originated as 
just such an action, though it was filed after the boat’s 
disposition occurred.  Id.  at 7, 979 P.2d at 592.)  We 
nonetheless held that the disposition of an impounded vessel w as 
an interest protected by due process under article I, section 5 
of the Hawai i Constitution, and the owner should have been 
afforded a hearing prior to  deprivation.  Id. at 12- 13, 979 
P.2d at 597-98.  As in this case, the declaratory action in 
Brown simply provided one procedural route through which the 
owner could vindicate his protected interest.  The ability to 
seek declaratory relief did not diminish the right to due 
process protection of the interest, nor did it preclude other 
procedural protections. 
  Similarly, the importance of not restricting the due 
process protection to the exclusivity approach advocated by the 
dissent is manifest in this case.  A belated post-decision civil 
action for declaratory relief is not a replacement for ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 43 participation in a hearing before the PUC, and it does not 
33eliminate the risk of wrongful deprivation.   Short of the 
“extraordinary remedy” of a preliminary injunction, Morgan v. 
Planning Dep ’t, Cty. of Kauai , 104 Hawai i 173, 188, 86 P.3d 982, 
997 (2004), an administrative decision may go into effect during 
the pendency of a suit for declaratory relief.  This is of 
particular concern in the context of environmental regulations, 
where the damage caused by a violation is not easily reversed.  
And requiring relitigation of agency decisions is inefficient 
and imposes an increased burden on the State in contrast to 
resolving the challenge in the initial decision-making process.  
Brown, 91 Hawai i at 12, 979 P.2d at 597 (concluding that “ the 
additional safeguard of a hearing would not significantly 
increase the burden on the state ”); see also Sandy Beach Def. 
                                                        
 33 The dissent contends that by holding that due process provides 
for participation in a hearing, we are making “a policy argument” and 
supplanting “the legislature’s role by making our own policy decisions.”  
Dissent at 17 n.9 (quoting Konno v. Cty. of Haw. , 85 Hawai i 61, 75, 937 P.2d 
397, 411 (1997)).  The dissent incorrectly conflates the substantive right 
granted by article XI, section 9, which is intended to be established through 
environmental legislation, with the procedures by which that right is 
enforced.  The minimum  procedural protections that must be afforded before a 
party may be deprived of an interest protected by due process are a matter of 
constitutional law derived from our interpretation of article I, section 5--
not policy judgments.  “Our ultimate authority is the Constitution; and the 
courts, not the legislature, are the ultimate interpreters of the 
Constitution.”  State v. Bani , 97 Hawai i 285, 291 n.4, 36 P.3d 1255, 1261 n.4 
(2001) (quoting State v. Nakata , 76 Hawai i 360, 370, 878 P.2d 699, 709  
(1994)); s ee also State v. Quitog , 85 Hawai i 128, 130 n.3, 938 P.2d 559, 561 
n.3 (1997) (recognizing the Hawai i Supreme Court as “the ultimate judicial 
tribunal with final, unreviewable authority to interpret and enforce the 
Hawai
i Constitution” (quoting State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai i 1, 28, 928 P.2d 843, 
870 (1996)))
. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 44 Fund, 70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261 (stating that evaluation 
of whether procedures are  required by due process requires 
weighing the risk of an erroneous deprivation and the probable 
value of alternative procedural safeguards against the burden on 
the State).  Constitutional
 due process calls for a far more 
flexible measure of protection than the one-size-fits-
all 
approach advocated by the dissent.  See Sandy Beach Def.  Fund, 
70 Haw. at 378, 773 P.2d at 261 (“Due process is not a fixed 
concept requiring a specific procedural course in every 
situation.  ‘[D]ue process is flexible and calls for such 
procedural protect ions as the particular situation demands.’”  
(quoting Morrissey v. Brewer , 408 U.S. 471, 481 (1972) 
(alteration in original) )).   
  We also do not agree with Maui Electric , the 
Commission, and the dissent’s assertion that only those living 
adjacent to the Pu ʻunene Plant would be able to demonstrate a 
protectable property interest in this case.  Dissent at 10.  
While proximity to the property at issue may be relevant, there 
is no requirement in our law that  a person must be living 
adjacent to physical property in order to be adversely affected 
by the use of that property.  Instead, we consider whether a 
protected property right has been adversely a ffected.  See Pele 
Def. Fund
, 77 Hawai ʻi at 68, 881 P.2d at 1214 ; Life of the Land  
v. Land Use Comm ’n, 63 Haw. 166, 176 –77, 623 P.2d 431, 441 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 45 (1981) (holding environmental organization “and its members have 
a ‘stake’ in the outcome of the alleged controversy adequate to 
invoke judicial intervention, even though they are neither 
owners nor adjoining owners of land ” because article XI, section 
9 recognizes environmental interests “ as personal and special 
interests or ‘rights ’” (emphasis added)). 
  The United States Supreme Court discussed the issue of 
interstate air pollution in a recent decision:  
Pollutants generated by upwind sources are often 
transported by air currents, sometimes over hundreds of 
miles, to downwind States.  As the pollution travels out of 
state, upwind States are relieved of the associated costs.  
Those costs are borne instead by the downwind States, whose 
ability to achieve and maintain satisfactory air quality is 
hampered by the steady stream of infiltrating pollution.  
E.P.A. v. EME Homer City Generation, L.P. , 134 S. Ct. 1584, 1592 
(2014).  Indeed, it is commonly understood that “[a]ir pollution 
is transient” and is “heedless” of even “state boundaries.”   Id.  
Accordingly, those who are adversely affected by g reenhouse gas 
emissions produced by the burning of fossil fuels may not 
necessarily be limited to those who live in the areas 
34immediately adjacent to the source of the emissions.    
                                                        
 34 As stated earlier, HC&S agreed to a Consent Order for alleged 
emissions violations at the Pu ʻunene Plant, which included a requirement that 
HC&S monitor the air quality at local schools.  See supra note 7.  It is 
noted that three of the five proposed schools for air monitoring are located 
between nine and eleven miles from the Pu ʻunene Plant.  See  Dep’t of Health v. 
Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Co. , 14
-CA-EO-01 (June 7, 2016), available at  
http://health.hawaii.gov/cab/files/2016/06/2016_06_07__No._14 -CA-EO-01-HCS-
CO-signed-by-DDEH.pdf.  A map of the County of Maui is available through the 
County of Maui website.  Land Permit Map Viewer, County of Maui Hawaii, 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 46   By extension, the fact that HC&S was already burning 
fossil fuels does not mean that the continued burning of fossil 
fuel--and subsequent release of additional emissions into the 
air--is not sufficient to demonstrate an adverse effect on the 
35right to a clean and healthful environment.   The fact that 
there was a preexisting agreement between Maui Electric and HC&S 
does not exempt Maui Electric ’s Application from the State’s 
established policies regarding greenhouse gas emissions and 
renewable energy as set out in HRS Chapter 269.  Indeed, many of 
Chapter 269’s safeguards did not exist at the time that the pre -
existing agreement was initially reviewed by the Commission in 
1990.  However, regardless of whether there was an existing 
agreement pursuant to which Maui Electric and HC&S could have 
continued to operate, Maui Electric  sought the Commission’s 
approval of a newly negotiated agreement that was subject to all 
the requirements of HRS Chapter 269 .  As discussed, the 
consideration of whether energy charges are reasonable or a 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
http://www.co.maui.hi.us/80/Land -Permit-Map-Viewer (last visited Dec. 9, 
2016).  
 35 Relatedly, Maui Electric’s assertion that its Application only 
concerns the “business terms” of the Agree ment and would have little to no 
impact on how the energy is generated is unsupported by the record.  For 
example, the Commission’s Decision and Order notes that the decrease in 
regularly scheduled energy from HC&S may result in the reactivation of Maui
Electric’s older power pl ants that run on fossil fuels.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 47 business arrangement is prudent would necessarily involve an 
evaluation of the hidden and long- term costs of the activities 
of the Pu ʻunene Plant, including consideration of the potential 
for harmful greenhouse gas emissions.  The Commission’s 
assertion that “environmental preferences and concerns as to air 
quality” “are beyond the scope of Chapter 269” are directly 
36contradicted by Chapter 269,  the legislative history of Chapter 
37 38269,  
and the Commission’s own Decision and Order in this case.   
  W e conclude that, under the circumstances of this 
case, the protected property interest in a clean and healthful 
environment asserted by Sierra Club necessitated a hearing by 
the Commission to consider the impacts of approving the 
Agreement on Sierra Club ’s members’ right to a clean and 
                                                        
 36 As discussed, under  HRS Chapter 269, the Commission has an 
affirmative duty “to reduce the State’s reliance on fossil fuels through 
energy efficiency and increased renewable energy generation.”  HRS § 269-
6(b).  In doing so, the Commission must “explicitly consider” the effect of 
the State’s reliance on fossil fuels on the level of “greenhouse gas 
emissions.”  Id.
   
 37 As discussed, the legislative history of  HRS Chapter 269 
overwhelmingly demonstrates an established State policy of prioritizing the 
utilization of renewable energy sources to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 
addition to the potential economic benefits and enhanced reliability of the 
State’s energy supply.  See supra.  
 38 In its Decision and Order, the Commission specifically cites the 
State’s energy policy objectives and renewable energy goals, discusses the 
compelling need to reduce reliance on Maui Electric’s older plants that rely 
on fossil fuels, and notes that HC&S also may need to resort to burning 
fossil fuels to meet its obligations under the Agreement.  Accordingly, the 
Commission required Maui Electric to report quarterly with information 
regarding the reactivation of Maui Electric’s older power plants and the type 
of fuel burned by HC&S to meet its obligations under the agreement.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 48 healthful environment,  including the release of harmful 
greenhouse gases by the Puʻunene Plant that would result from the 
Agreement, whether the cost of the energy under the Agreement 
was reasonable in light of the potential for harmful emissions, 
and whether the terms of the Agreement were prudent in light of 
the potential hidden and long- term consequences of the 
39Agreement.    
  “We observe that procedural due process requires that 
a person have an ‘ opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time 
and in a meaningful manner.’”  Freitas v. Admin. Dir. of Courts , 
108 Hawaiʻ i 31, 44, 116 P.3d 673, 686 (2005)  (quoting Farmer v.  
Admin. Dir. of the Courts , 94 Hawai ʻi 232, 238, 11 P.3d 457, 463 
(2000)).  This includes the right to submit evidence and 
argument on the issues-- in this case the relevant issue being 
the impact of the A greement on the asserted property interest.  
See Application of Haw. Elec. Light Co. , 67 Hawai ʻi 425, 430, 690 
P.2d 274, 278 (1984).  Although the parties have the right to 
                                                        
 39 Thus, the ICA erred in concluding that the Commission was not 
required by law to hold a hearing on Maui Electric’s Application.  
Accordingly, In re Tawhiri Power LLC , 126 Hawai ʻi 242, 269 P.3d 777 (App. 
2012), is not applicable to this case.  
 
  The dissent asserts that our opinion may have unintended 
consequences elsewhere, such as in other situations where the legislature has 
mandated consideration of specific factors by executive agencies when 
implementing a statute.  Dissent at 14.  However, it is not the mandated 
consideration by executive agencies that creates a property interest; 
instead, it is the constitutional guarantee set forth in article XI, section 
9 and particularized by HRS Chapter 269 that defines the protectable property 
interest to a clean and healthful environment.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 49 present evidence, cross-examine opposing evidence, and submit 
rebuttal evidence, “considerations of relevancy,  materiality, 
and repetition”  limit the presentation of evidence in contested 
case proceedings.  See id.; see also  HRS § 91-10(1) (2012); 
Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Haw.  v. Sullivan , 87 Hawai ʻi 
217, 236, 953 P.2d 1315, 1334 (1998); Cazimero v. Kohala Sugar  
Co., 54 Haw. 479, 483, 510 P.2d 89, 92 (1973).  Accordingly, the 
Commission has the authority  to set limitations in conducting 
the proceedings so long as the procedures sufficiently afford an 
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful 
manner on the issue of the Agreement’s impact on the asserted 
property interest.    
2. Standing   
  “Establishing that a contested case took place does 
not end the inquiry into justiciability. ”  Pele Def. Fund
 v. 
Puna Geothermal Venture , 77 Hawai ʻi 64, 69, 881 P.2d 1210, 1215 
(1994).  Sierra Club must also show that it is “entitled to 
request a review of the agency determination.”   Id. (quoting 
Mahuiki v. Planning Comm’n , 65 Haw. 506, 513, 654 P.2d 874, 879 
(1982)).  In order to establish standing, a plaintiff must have 
suffered an actual or threatened injury; the injury must be 
fairly traceable to the defendant’s actions; and a favorable 
decision would likely provide relief for the plaintiff’s injury.  
Sierra Club v. Dep’t of Transp. , 115 Hawai ʻi 299, 319, 167 P.3d ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 50 292, 312 (2007).  Environmental plaintiffs must meet this three-
part standing test but need not assert an injury that is 
different in kind from an injury to the public generally.  Id. 
at 320, 167 P.3d at 313 .  We “will recognize harms to 
plaintiffs’ environmental interests as injuries that may provide 
the basis for standing.”  Id.  This lower standard that is 
applied when environmental rights are asserted has long been 
established in our law.  See Application  of Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 
56 Haw. 260, 264–65 n.1, 535 P.2d 1102, 1105 –06 n.1 (1975) 
(“Aesthetic and environmental well-being, like economic well-
being, are important ingredients of the quality of life in our 
society, and the fact that particular environmental interests 
are shared by the many rather than the few does not make them 
less deserving of legal protection through the judicial 
process.”  (quoting United States v. Students Challenging 
Regulatory Agency Procedures (SCRAP) , 412 U.S. 669, 685 
(1973))).  
  Further, we recognize that “where the interests at 
stake are in the realm of environmental concerns[,] ‘we have not 
been inclined to foreclose challenges to administrative 
determinations through restrictive applications of standing 
requirements.’”  Kilakila ʻO Haleakala v. Bd. of Land & Nat. 
Res., 131 Hawai ʻi 193, 204, 317 P.3d 27, 38 (2013) (alteration in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 51 original) (quoting Citizens for Prot. of N. Kohala Coastline v.
Cty. of Haw., 91 Hawai ʻi 94, 100, 979 P.2d 1120, 1126 (1999)).   
 
  “[T]he injury prong of the standing inquiry requires 
an assertion of a judicially cognizable injury, that is, a harm 
to some legally protected interest. ”  Sierra Club v. Dep’t of 
Transp., 115 Hawai ʻi at 321, 167 P
.3d at 314.  As discussed, 
Sierra Club has established that its members possess a right to 
a clean and healthful environment under article XI, section 9 of 
the Hawaiʻ i Constitution, which includes, under HRS Chapter 269, 
that explicit consideration be given to the reduction of the 
State’s reliance on foss il fuels and the effects of greenhouse 
gas emissions in the decision-making of the Commission.  
Accordingly, we consider whether the affidavits of Sierra Club’s 
members assert harm to legally protected interests in a clean 
and healthful environment.  
  T he Apana and Andrews affidavits  demonstrate a 
threatened injury to the right to a clean and healthful 
environment from the effect of greenhouse gas emissions.  Both 
affidavits explain the potential health effects of burning coal 
and the potential impacts of the operations of the Pu ʻunene Plant 
on Apana and Andrews’ s health.  The Apana affidavit states that 
the Commission’s decision could impact the level of coal burning 
at the Pu ʻunene Plant, a ffecting Apana’s “long -term health and 
well-being.”  The Andrews affidavit states that “the Department ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 52 of Health issued the Pu ʻunene plant a Notice of Violation in 2014 
40and a million dollar fine regarding its emissions of opacity.”   
Andrews discloses in her Affidavit that due to her concerns 
about air pollution,  she closes the windows at her home and runs 
air filters inside her house when emissions levels are high.  
The Andrews affidavit further expressed concern that HC&S “burns 
more coal and produced more air pollution in order to meet its 
obligations” to Maui Electric and that the Commission’s decision 
with regard to the Application could impact her “lon g-term 
health and well- being.” 
  Accordingly, a threatened injury to Sierra Club’s 
members that is fairly traceable to the operations of HC&S was 
sufficiently established to satisfy standing.  See Mottl v. 
Miyahara, 95 Hawai ʻi 381, 394, 23 P.3d 716, 729 (2001) 
(“[A]lthough difficult to quantify, deterioration of air quality 
and odor nuisance are ‘distinct and palpable’  injuries .” 
(quoting Akinaka v. Disciplinary Bd. of Haw. Supreme Ct., 91 
Hawaiʻi 51, 55, 979 P.2d 1077, 1081 (1999)); see also Kilakila ʻO 
Haleakala , 131 Hawai ʻi at 205, 317 P.3d at 39 (concluding that 
the organization dedicated to the protection of the sacredness 
of the summit of Haleakalā  had standing to pursue a HRS § 91-14 
                                                        
 40 The Andrews affidavit indicates that “opacity is a measure of 
particular matter pollution.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 53 appeal based on the threatened injury to its Native Hawaiian 
traditional and customary practices and its aesthetic and 
environmental interests in the summit area).  
III. CONCLUSION  
  For the reasons discussed above, a due process hearing 
was required to protect the asserted property right to a clean 
and healthful environment guaranteed by article XI, section 9 
and defined by HRS Chapter 269.  Accordingly, the ICA erred in 
determining that no appellate jurisdiction existed over Sierra 
Club’s appeal.  The ICA’s January 20, 2016 “Order Granting Maui 
Electric Company, Ltd’s November 9, 2015 Motion to Dismiss 
Appeal for Lack of Appellate Jurisdiction ” is vacated, and the 
case is remanded to the ICA for further proceedings. 
 
Kylie W. Wager and 
Isaac H. M oriwake 
for petitioner 
 
Randall C. Whattoff,  
James E. Abraham, and 
Rebecca D . Matsushima 
for respondent  
Maui Electric Company, Ltd.  
 
Mark J. Kaetsu and 
Thomas C. Gorak  
for respondent 
Public Utilities Commission 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
