**  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
  
vs. 
 
SAMUEL JOO RIM SU, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-18-0000692 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000692; CASE NO. 1DTA- 18-00252)  
 
JUNE 23, 2020 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction 
 Samuel Joo Rim Su (“Su”) was convicted of Operating a 
Vehicle under the Influence of an Intoxicant (“OVUII”).  At 
trial, his coun sel sought to impeach the credibility of one of 
the State’s witness, Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) Officer 
Jared Spiker (“Officer Spiker”) , under Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000692
23-JUN-2020
03:25 PM**  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
2 
 (“HRE”) Rule 608(b).  That rule states , in relevant part,  as 
follows: 
Specific instances of conduct.   Specific instances of the 
conduct of a witness, for the purpose of attacking the 
witness’ credibility, if probative of untruthfulness, may 
be inquired into on cross -examination of the witness and, 
in the discretion of the court, may be proved by extrinsic 
evidence. . . .   
 
Defense counsel contended that the “specific instances of 
conduct” evi ncing Officer Spiker’s untruthfulness were contained 
in transcripts from three other proceedings in which Officer 
Spiker was a witness for the State :  State v. Kuni , State v. 
Lee, and State v. Thomas .  The District Court of the First 
Circuit (“district court”)1 did not allow defense counsel to 
cross-examine Officer S piker concerning these proceedings, 
ruling that none were probative of Officer Spiker’s 
untruthfulness.   
 The Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) upheld the 
evidentiary rulings  in a summary disposition order (“SDO”) .  
State v. Su , CAAP-18-0000692 (App. May 30, 2019) (SDO) at 5.   
The ICA further stated that the district court “was able to 
review all the materials” submitted by defense counsel 
concerning the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings.  Su, SDO at 6.  
Therefore, the ICA held, the district court “had  ‘in its 
possession sufficient information to appraise the biases and 
motivations of the witness’ and did not abuse its discretion by 
 
1  The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
3 
 preventing further cross -examination of Officer Spiker” 
concerning his testimony in those proceedings.  Id.  
 We accepted certiorari to clarify that admissibility of 
evidence under  HRE Rule 608(b)2 involves a two-step 
inquiry:  (1) whether the specific conduct evidence proffered for 
the “purpose of attacking the witness ’[s] credibility ” is 
“probative of  untruthful ness,” and , if so, (2) whether the 
probative value of the specific conduct is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the 
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue 
delay, waste of time, or needless prese ntation of cumulative 
evidence  pursuant to HRE Rule 403 .  An appellate court reviews 
the trial court’s two -step admissibility determination under the 
right/wrong standard as to the first step, and under the abuse 
of discretion standard as to the second ste p.  We also accepted 
certiorari to correct the ICA’s SDO to the extent that it 
suggests that a trial court can consider  excluded evidence in 
reaching judgment.     
 We therefore vacate the ICA’s July 2, 2019 Judgment on 
Appeal, as well as the district court’s August 2, 2018 Judgment.  
 
2  We are addressing the evidentiary rule.  A defendant  has a 
constitutional right to cross -examine a witness and elicit testimony upon 
matters bearing upon the witness ’s credibility.  See State v. Jones , 62 Haw. 
572, 578, 617 P.2d 1214, 1219 (1980).  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
4 
 This case is remanded to the district court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
II.  Background  
A.  District court proceedings  
 On January 24, 2018, the State charged Su via Complaint 
with one count of OVUII, in violation of HRS § 291E -61(a)(1) 
and/or (a)(3)  (2007).3 
 1.  Defense notices of intent to use impeachment evidence 
  a.  First notice of intent (Kuni ADLRO proceedings)  
 On May 1, 2018, Su filed three Notices of Intent to Use 
Impeachment Evidence against the State’s witness, Officer 
Spiker.  The first notice of intent informed the court that Su 
intended to use extrinsic evidence, in the form of transcripts 
of a proceeding, from an unrelat ed ADLRO hearing involving 
Respondent Selina Kuni, to show that Spiker had “admitted to 
submitting a false sworn statement” to ADLRO.   The transcript 
read as follows, with emphasis added:  
ATTORNEY BURK [counsel for Selina Kuni]:  Okay.  And after 
going to the police station, taking Ms. Kuni to the police 
station, you went over the notice of administrative 
revocation with her?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  And following, I guess after going 
over the notice of administrative revocati on with her you 
also signed the fourth page, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
3  Su was ultimately tried on just the HRS § 291E -61(a)(1) charge.   
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
5 
  
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  And on the fourth page you swear and 
affirm that the pages one to four of the form that you 
handed in provided to the ADLRO were read to her and was 
issued to her? 
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
. . . . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Yeah.  So I am handing you exhibit A for 
identification.  Do you recognize that?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  And what do you recognize that to 
be? 
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Appears to be the revocation paper I read 
to Ms. Kuni.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  The first page only.  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  The first page, yeah.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK: Okay.  
 
. . . . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  Now and this was the form that you 
gave to Ms. Kuni?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  I believe so, yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  Now could you look at the form which 
was handed to the ADLRO?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Uh huh.  
 
. . . . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  And we direct you to part one, paragraph 
two. 
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Those are diffe rent, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  So the form that you issued, the 
form that you issued to Ms. Kuni is in fact not the form 
that you provided to the ADLRO?  It is not identical to the 
one you provided to ADLRO?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
6 
 ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  And the form that you issued or gave 
to the A[D]LRO, handed in to the ADLRO you had altered the 
form after giving it to Ms. Kuni, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  I believe so, yes . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Explain, if you have an e xplanation, or if 
you recall.  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  I can’t recall why I did that because 
normally I normally check it off and then make the copies 
but I can’t recall why, I know she initialed everything 
that she refused.  I just made an error on my part.  As I 
recall she did initial a refusal  . . .  I guess it is just 
–- 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  But whenever, on the form when you swear 
and affirm that you handed that form to her, that is not in 
fact true then, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes, in this instance, yes, not  true. 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Thank you.  No further questions.  
 
(Some emphases added.)       
  b.  Second notice of intent:  Lee OVUII trial    
 In the second notice of intent, Su asked the district court 
to take judicial notice of the records and files in an unrelated 
OVUII case, State v. Lee .  He intended to use, as extrinsic 
evidence, testimony Officer Spiker provided about how the 
defendant in that case, Michelle Lee, had been driving on the 
wrong side of the road.  The judge in the Lee case, Judge Lanson 
Kupau, specifically found that Officer Spiker’s testimony did 
not make “physical sense” and acquitted the defendant.  Spiker’s 
testimony had proceeded as follows:  
Q [by the State on direct examination]:  And, Officer 
Spiker, on . . . October 26 , 2016, what did you initially 
stop the defendant for?  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
7 
 A: [Spiker]:  The defendant was driving on the wrong side 
of the road, crossing the double solid yellow lines on 
Kapiʻolani Boulevard just prior to Pi ʻikoi Street.  
 
. . . . 
 
Q:  And what was your vantage point when you observed [the 
vehicle going on the wrong side of the road]?  
 
A:  I’d say about maybe 20 yards away.  
 
. . . . 
 
A:  It was traveling head -on in the opposite direction.  I 
was traveling east on Kapiʻolani Boulevard and the -- and 
the vehicle was traveling west in the furthest makai lane.  
 
 
Q:  All right.  And about how far away was the vehicle when 
you first made this observation?  
 
A:  I’d say about 20  yards. 
 
Q:  Okay.  And do you recall, you said also that you saw 
the vehicle cross over double solid yellow lines ? 
 
A:  Yes.  
 
Q:  When did you see that in the sequence of events?  
 
A:  . . . . [W]hat caught my attention was I observed a 
white BMW, it was a bout -- from my estimation about three 
to five yards over the double solid yellow line, traveling 
west in the eastbound side of Kapiʻolani Boulevard.  
 
Q:  Okay.  
 
A:  For about four to eight seconds.  That’s what caught my 
attention.  
 
. . . . 
  
Q:  . . . .  And which lane were you in on the eastbound 
direction?  
 
A:  On the middle lane.  
 
On cross -examination, the defense attorney elicited the 
following testimony from Officer Spiker about his observations 
of the defendant’s driving:  
Q:  On October 26 you said you were 20 yards away, correct, 
when you first observe[d] Miss Lee?  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
8 
  
A:  It’s an estimate around there, yes.  
 
Q:  About 20 yards.  And but you were traveling, correct?  
 
A:  Yes.  
 
Q:  You were driving?  
 
A:  Yes.  
 
Q:  Okay.  And what is the speed limit  in the area?  
 
A:  Thirty -five miles per hour.  
 
Q:  And were you going [the] speed limit or were you going 
slower or faster would you estimate when you first saw [the 
defendant driving]?  
 
A:  Maybe -- maybe a little slower than the speed limit.  
 
Q:  So about 30 maybe?  
 
A:  I can’t speculate.  Maybe 25.  
 
Q:  Okay.  Is -- well, and would you estimate Miss Lee was 
driving at about the speed limit?  
 
A:  I’d say around there.  I can’t recall her speed.  
 
Q:  She was -- but speeding wasn’t an issue?  
 
A:  She wa s not traveling -- she was not speeding, no.  
 
 At the close of evidence, defense counsel moved for a 
judgment of acquittal, arguing that Officer Spiker’s testimony 
“just doesn’t make sense.”   Defense counsel argued there should 
have been a collision betwee n the defendant and Officer Spiker 
if, as Officer Spiker testified, (1) both were separated by a 
distance of 20 yards; (2) he was traveling at 25 miles an hour; 
(3) she was traveling at 35 miles an hour; (4) the defendant was 
“three to five yards” over the  double solid yellow line, meaning 
in Officer Spiker’s lane of travel; and (5) Officer Spiker 
observed her driving towards him for four to eight seconds.   The **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
9 
 district court granted the defendant’s motion for judgment of 
acquittal, stating the following:  
Looking in the light most favorable to State and resting 
solely upon the testimony of Officer Spiker at this point 
in time, the Court agrees with defense counsel.  Officer 
Spiker’s testimony simply does not make sense as he was -- 
he testified that she cros sed the double solid line three 
to five yards, which is nine to fifteen feet, at 
approximately 20 yards away from him in the opposite 
direction.  
 And if she was going the speed limit, and even if he 
was going at 25 miles an hour, within seconds that places  
her not only in the direct lane oncoming Officer Spiker, 
but at 15 feet at his outside estimate would place her in 
the -- partially the middle lane.  So and in the event at 
that speed and if we listen to Officer Spiker and that she 
was at that distance fo r four to eight seconds simply 
doesn’t make physical sense.  
 As a result, the Court cannot take his testimony and 
grants the motion for judgment of acquittal.  
 
  c.  Third notice of intent:  Thomas harassment trial 
 Lastly, in the third notice of intent, S u’s counsel asked 
the district court to take judicial notice of the records and 
files in an unrelated harassment case involving defendant 
Darrell Thomas, whom the district court found not guilty after a 
bench trial.   Su’s counsel intended to introduce extr insic 
evidence of Officer Spiker’s police report, recounting Thomas’s 
actions during a brawl in the lobby of the Ala Moana Hotel.   
Su’s counsel alleged the details in the police report “d[id] not 
match the video evidence from the case.”   Specifically, Offi cer 
Spiker’s police report related that, during the brawl, he 
encountered Thomas, who “had a fighting stance and his fists 
were clenched. ”  The police report stated Thomas refused to 
comply when Officer Spiker placed him under arrest for **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
10 
 harassment, so Officer Spiker  “did a double -leg take down and 
took [Thomas] to the ground. ”  According to the police report, 
Thomas then told Officer Spiker, “[F] uck you pig.”   
 Su’s counsel asserted that video evidence showed Thomas 
assisting a person who  had been knocked out and was lying on the 
ground.  According to Su’s counsel, a third party pushed Thomas 
into Officer Spiker, who then tackled Thomas to the ground and 
ran out of the hotel lobby.   Su’s counsel stated Officer Spiker 
then returned to the h otel lobby and confronted Thomas, who held 
his open palms out and appeared to be pleading with Officer 
Spiker.  Su’s counsel contended Officer Spiker then arrested and 
handcuffed Thomas without incident.   
 To support his argument, Su’s counsel appended a 
declaration from Thomas’s counsel, William Li, averring that the 
still photos  (appended as exhibits to the notice of intent)  
accurately depicted the incident  that was  captured on a video -
recording of the Ala Moana Hotel lobby, which had been entered 
into evidence in Thomas’s case.   Su’s counsel represented  that 
the video -recording was “later destroyed by the prosecution.”  
 Su’s counsel also appended as exhibits the trial 
transcripts in Thomas’s case, in which Officer Spiker testified 
consistently with his police report.   Su’s counsel argued that, 
on cross -examination, Officer Spiker stated that the video -**  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
11 
 recording did not show Thomas with clenched fists or throwing 
punches.   Thomas was ultimately acquitted.        
 2.  The State ’s memorandum in opposition to     
  Defendant’s notices of intent #1, #2, and #3  
 
 In its memorandum in opposition to  the defense’s three 
notices of intent, the State asked the district court to 
preclude introduction of the evidence from the Kuni, Lee, and 
Thomas proceedings.   The State quoted State v. Torres , 85 Hawaiʻi 
417, 425, 945 P.2d 849, 857 (App. 1997), for the following 
proposition about HRE Rule 608:  “[W]itness character evidence 
may be defined as evidence that directly relates to general 
credibility of the witness, rather than the believability of 
specific testimony, and conveys some judgment about the ethics  
or moral qualities of that witness.”   The ICA in Torres went on 
to note that, “in many circumstances, a witness’ s misstatements 
may be due to defects in memory or knowledge, or attributable to 
bias, rather than indicative o f untruthfulness.”   85 Hawaiʻi at 
427, 945 P.2d at 859.   The State argued that Officer Spiker’s 
testimony in the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings “ only show 
that Officer Spiker is a human being” who makes mistakes; may 
not accurately estimate distances and speeds; and may not 
remember t he exact details of an incident that occurred months 
earlier, lasted two minutes, and involved over 60 people 
brawling in a hotel lobby.   First, the State argued that Officer **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
12 
 Spiker’s testimony in the Kuni proceeding showed only that he 
checked off a box o n Kuni’s paperwork later and that he 
“admit[ted] to making a mistake.”   Second, the State contended 
that Officer Spiker’s testimony in the Lee case was “rejected 
because ‘it didn’t make sense’ to Judge Kupau, not because 
Officer Spiker had a reputation or character for 
untruthfulness.”   Third, the State asserted that discrepancies 
in Officer Spiker’s police report and the video -recording in the 
Thomas case, at most, called into question his “credibility as 
to personal knowledge,” but did not give rise to a “character of 
untruthfulness.”            
 3.  Trial  
 Disposition of Su’s notices of intent was consolidated with 
trial on the HRS § 291E -61(a)(1) charge.   The district court 
proposed calling Officer Spiker to the stand for direct 
examination, after which i t would address the defense’s notices 
of intent; counsel for the State and for Su agreed.   
 Before Officer Spiker was called to testify, however, the 
State called Officer Mitchell Cadena (“Officer Cadena”) to 
testify.   Officer Cadena testified  that on Jan uary 6, 2018, at 
approximately 12:55 a.m., he saw Su on a moped on Wilder Avenue 
going eastbound, prior to Keʻeaumoku Street.   Su was “driving 
like ‘S’ pattern in the lane,” meaning he was “[g]oing side to 
side within the lane,” before crossing into an adjacent **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
13 
 eastbound lane of travel twice, and then crossing the double -
yellow line into the westbound lanes of travel once.   Officer 
Cadena then initiated a traffic stop and called for back -up; 
Officer Spiker would arrive in a few minutes to assist Officer 
Cadena.  Upon speaking with Su, Officer Cadena “detected an odor 
of some sort of an alcoholic beverage emitting from [Su’s] 
breath,” and noted Su’s “eyes were red, watery, and glassy.”    
 The State then called Officer Spiker, who testified on 
direct examination that he covered Officer Cadena on a traffic 
stop; Officer Cadena had pulled over Su, and Officer Spiker 
asked Su to perform three standardized field sobriety tests:  
the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test, the Walk -and-Turn test, and 
the One-Leg Stand test.   Officer Spiker testified that he 
detected a strong odor of an alcoholic type beverage coming from 
Su’s breath, and Su had red , glassy, watery eyes; slurred 
speech; and a red, flushed face.   Officer Spiker testified that 
Su was unsteady on his feet throughout the tests, for example, 
swaying during the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test, missing 
several steps and not following instruc tions on the Walk -and-
Turn test, and hopping about with his arms extended to balance 
himself on the One -Leg Stand test.   Officer Spiker then arrested 
Su on suspicion of OVUII.     
 After Officer Spiker’s direct examination, he was excused 
from the courtroo m so that the district court could address the **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
14 
 defense’s notices of intent.   As to the first notice of intent, 
the district court ruled that it would not allow defense counsel 
to impeach Officer Spiker with the Kuni ADLRO proceedings, 
explaining as follows : 
So the court’s going to note that the court does agree with 
the State in a sense that [Officer Spiker] did make the 
markings.  He looked at it.  He -- in his testimony, he 
explained why he did it.  He said it was an error on his 
part.  He did -- he recal led he did initial a refusal.  And 
so based on that, the court’s going to note that he 
admitted that the form was altered after giving it to her.  
So while -- I guess -- well, technically, they signed the 
forms.  He did explain what he did and that he made  an 
error, and he explained it.  So based on that, the court is 
going to not allow counsel to cross -examine him in regard 
to the ADLRO . . . . 
 
Defense counsel registered his objection to the ruling.   The 
district court then went into greater detail about h ow it was 
applying the evidence rules to the notices of intent, stating 
the following:  
[T]here’s a whole bunch of rules that the court has to look 
at in regard to this, relevanc y, 402, 404 -- . . . . 608.  
[S]pecifically, for 608(b), the court has to look for 
specific instances of conduct of a witness for the -- for 
the purpose of attacking the witness’s credibility if 
probative of untruthfulness.  That’s when it can be 
inquired into on cross -examination.  So in light of the 
fact that at the time when he wa s questioned about it, he 
explained it and -- and -- and that -- and of that nature, 
then the court is going to -- that’s why the court’s 
denying it . . . . 
 
 With respect to the second notice of intent, the district 
court ruled that defense counsel could n ot cross -examine Officer 
Spiker about the Lee proceedings, rejecting defense counsel’s 
assertion that Judge Kupau found Officer Spiker “not credible” 
as follows:  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
15 
 I don’t know that [Judge Kupau] didn’t find [Officer 
Spiker’s testimony] credible.  I think he  just said that 
the testimony didn’t make sense in light of the distances 
and the time, you know.  And so based on that, it does 
sound -- the court doesn’t -- at no point does the court 
see [Judge Kupau] say that he finds [Officer Spiker] not 
credible.  Th e court just notes that he says that the 
testimony does not make sense.  He thinks it’s an 
impossibility to travel four to eight seconds at a speed of 
35 miles an hour while he’s going 25 miles an hour 20 miles 
-- 20 yards away and then to cross over for t hat amount of 
time.  It didn’t make sense to the court. . . . Officer 
Spiker was very clear when he said a number of times, you 
know, I’m not sure, I think it’s about this amount o r this 
distance.  He never particularly said yes, I’m a hundred 
percent sure . . . .  [T]he court’s going to note that he 
was trying to be honest, you know, and unfortunately, you 
know, what his testimony was didn’t make sense.  
 
Defense counsel noted his o bjection for the record.    
 With respect to the third notice of intent, the district 
court ruled that defense counsel could not cross -examine Officer 
Spiker about the Thomas proceedings:  
THE COURT:  [L]ooking at  . . . what was printed, the 
court’s not goin g to find that [Officer Spiker] lied that  
-- or that he misrepresented in his police report.  That 
was his version of what occurred.  It may not be exactly 
how it all played out, but that’s what he saw.  And -- the 
court’s going to say that based on the p hotos, it’s not -- 
it’s not a hundred percent clear that he was lying or that 
he was making something up.  There was clearly some kind of 
confrontation . . . .  
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Well, I mean, I don’t know if I want to 
say he’s lying, but . . . what he p uts in his reports is 
very inaccurate of what actually transpired.  At no time in 
the video do you ever see the person squaring up with 
clenched fists.  
 
. . . .  
 
THE COURT:  I only have stills.  The court does not see any 
clenched fist.  But the court doe s see body language that 
could indicate that he -- the defendant was squaring up    
. . . . 
 
The court doesn’t have the entire video.  The court --     
. . . . the pictures that the court has, I can’t see 
clearly his fists. . . .   
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
16 
 But nevertheless, just because someone’s not in a typical 
boxing stance, doesn’t mean that they’re not in a stance to 
fight.  
. . . .  
 
So that’s why the court is going to deny that.  
   
Defense counsel noted his objection for the record.   After the 
district court ruled on all three of the defense’s notices of 
intent, cross -examination of Officer Spiker proceeded.    
 The district court ultimately found Su guilty of OVUII.   In 
issuing its ruling from the bench, the district court made a 
specific finding that  Officer Spiker’s testimony was credible.   
As to whether Su’s driving indicated he was impaired, the 
district court noted “for some reason, it seems to be that a lot 
of people on mopeds seem to like to do that little ‘S’ thing,” 
so that manner of operating  the moped “in and of itself wasn’t a 
strong indicator” of impaired driving to the district court.   
However, the district court expressed its concern that Su had 
crossed over into other lanes of travel and could have gotten 
hurt.  The district court also e xplained how it weighed the 
officers’ testimonies as follows:  
[I]n making the decision on the impairment, the court 
weighs the driving with the field sobriety test so that 
everyone understands that the court -- if there’s really 
bad driving, the court does n’t expect -- doesn’t need to 
expect too much of a bad field sobriety test in order to 
find that there was impairment.  And vice versa, if the 
driving wasn’t too bad, then the -- then the court would be 
looking for some type of -- I guess worse type of -- or not 
as doing well on the field sobriety test.  
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, the district court 
found Su guilty.   Su timely appealed.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
17 
 B.  ICA appeal 
 1.  Su’s opening brief 
 On appeal,  Su argued the district court erred by precluding 
cross-examination of Officer Spiker as to his testimony in the 
Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings.   Su’s argument on appeal 
appears in two paragraphs at the end  of his opening brief: 
 Despite having given prior notice of 3 different 
instances of past untruthfulness of Officer Spiker, the 
trial court did not allow cross examination of any of the 
notice of intents.  Absent Spiker’s testimony, the court 
would not have concluded that SU was guilty.   
 In denying each  of the Notice of Intents, it was the 
court’s position that because Spiker tried to explain away 
his inconsistencies at the time, they were not false.  Yet, 
that is what cross examination is for.  The alleged 
falsifications were relevant towards determinin g Spiker’s 
credibility.  The court could have given whatever weight it 
wanted to the falsifications, but should have allowed cross 
examination on the issues raised in the notice of intents 
in order for it to do so under HRE 608(b).  See State v. 
Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 219, 738 P.2d 812, 823 (1987).  
 
Su then asked the ICA to “reverse”4 his conviction and remand his 
case for a new trial, as the cumulative effect of any individual 
errors warranted a new trial.    
 2.  The State’s answering brief 
 The State firs t noted that HRE Rule 608(b) “allows cross -
examination of a witness concerning specific instances of 
conduct that are relevant to the trait of credibility” and 
“governs attack of a witness by revelation of that witness’ 
 
4  Under Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35(e)  (2010), “[w]hen 
used in an opinion or dispositional order, the word ‘reverse’ ends litigation 
on the merits, and the phrase ‘vacate and remand’ indicates the litigation 
continues in the court or agency in accordance with the appellate court’s 
instruction.” Su’s opening brief appears to have requested that the ICA 
vacate and remand the district court’s judgment.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
18 
 relevant misdeeds ,” quoting the Supp lemental Commentary to HRE 
Rule 608.   The State argued that the district court did not 
abuse its discretion in disallowing cross -examination of Officer 
Spiker concerning the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings.   First, 
with respect to the Kuni proceedings, the State argued that the 
Kuni transcripts showed that Officer Spiker “made a mistake as 
opposed to showing that Officer Spiker was untruthful.”   Second, 
with respect to the Lee proceedings, the State pointed ou t that 
the transcripts do not bear out any express finding by Judge 
Kupau that Officer Spiker was “uncredible”; rather, Judge Kupau 
found Officer Spiker’s testimony concerning distances and speeds 
did not make physical sense.   Third, with respect to the Thomas 
proceedings, the State argued that defense counsel had not put 
the video -recording into evidence at Su’s trial; therefore, 
there was no basis to argue that the video -recording would 
demonstrate Officer Spiker’s untruthfulness.   Further, the State 
pointed out that Su’s counsel himself argued that Officer Spiker 
may not necessarily be untruthful, as follows: “Well, I mean, I 
don’t know if I want to say [Officer Spiker is] lying, but . . . 
what he puts in his report is very inaccurate of what actually 
transpired.”  
 3.  The ICA’s summary disposition order 
The ICA affirmed the district court’s Judgment  in an SDO.  
Su, SDO at 1.   The ICA stated it “d[id] not disagree” with the **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
19 
 district court’s finding that “each instance did not constitute 
examples of untruth fulness under HRE Rule 608(b).”  Su, SDO at 
5.  As to the first instance, the ICA concluded, “The transcript 
of ADLRO proceedings submitted by Su reflected that Officer 
Spiker had been shown the Notice of Revocation form, which he 
acknowledged he marked af ter making copies and that he made a 
mistake and did not follow his normal procedure.”   Id.  The ICA 
footnoted the fact that neither the purportedly inconsistent 
ADLRO forms, nor further transcripts in the Kuni proceedings 
about the purportedly inconsisten t ADLRO forms, were entered 
into the record with Su’s first notice of intent.   Su, SDO at 3 
n.2.   
As to the second instance, the ICA concluded, “The 
transcript of Officer Spiker’s testimony in the Lee case showed 
that he testified as to estimates of dista nce and speed and that 
he was not certain of these numbers.”   Su, SDO at 5.    
As to the third instance, the ICA concluded, “Finally, 
although the screen shots of the surveillance  videos in the 
Thomas case did not depict, for example, the clenched fist or a 
classic fighting stance that Officer Spiker maintained Thomas 
displayed during the incident, neither the screen shots nor the 
video recordings themselves purported to be a complete 
documentation of the incident.”   Su, SDO at 5 -6.  The ICA 
considered each of the instances to be “fairly . . . **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
20 
 characterized as mistakes, inaccuracies in memory or differences 
in interpretations of another’s actions.”   Su, SDO at 5.    
The ICA went on to observe the followi ng: 
Furthermore, the District Court, having consolidated the 
hearing on the Notices of Intent with trial was able to 
review all the materials included in those Notices and the 
additional exhibits presented, and had “in its possession 
sufficient information  to appraise the biases and 
motivations of the witness” and did not abuse its 
discretion by preventing further cross -examination of 
Officer Spiker on these incidents.  
 
Su, SDO at 6 (citing State v. Sabog, 108 Hawaiʻi 102, 107, 117 
P.3d 834, 839 (App. 2005) ).   
C.  Certiorari proceedings  
 On certiorari, Su argues that the ICA erred in ruling that 
the district court properly precluded cross -examination of 
Officer Spiker about the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings.   
Before this court,  Su repeats, verbatim, the two -paragraph 
argument made before the ICA.   Su further argues that the ICA 
erred in “agree[ing] with the [district] court that because 
Spiker tried to explain  [the purported discrepancy between Kuni 
ADLRO forms] away in another proceeding, h e had already been 
questioned about the form and explained it.”   As to the notices 
of intent involving the Lee and Thomas proceedings, Su merely 
states that he had shown prima facie evidence of untruthfulness 
on the part of Officer Spiker in these other pr oceedings; 
therefore, the ICA erred in concluding that the district court **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
21 
 did not abuse its discretion in disallowing cross -examination 
about Officer Spiker’s testimony in those proceedings.  
 Su also criticizes the ICA’s SDO for stating, “ Furthermore, 
the District Court, having consolidated the hearings on the 
Notices of Intent with trial was able to review all the 
materials included in those Notices and the additional exhibits 
presented, and had ‘in its possession sufficient information to 
appraise the bia ses and motivations of the witness’ and did not 
abuse its discretion by preventing further cross -examination of 
Officer Spiker on these incidents.”   Su, SDO at 6 ( citing Sabog, 
108 Hawaiʻi at 107, 117 P.3d at 839).  Su contends that the 
district court excl uded the evidence; therefore, it could not 
have appraised the biases and motivations of Officer Spiker  
using that evidence .  Su argues that limiting his cross -
examination of Officer Spiker was not harmless error, because 
the district court “ruled5 that absen[t] Spiker’s testimony, she 
would not have concluded that SU was guilty.”   
 The State ’s Response does not engage with the merits of 
Su’s arguments; rather, the State contends that Su’s application 
merely re -litigates his ICA appeal.  
 
5  The district court m ade no such ruling.  It stated that it balanced 
Officer Cadena’s testimony concerning Su’s manner of driving with Officer 
Spiker’s testimony concerning Su’s performance on the standardized field 
sobriety tests to determine Su operated his moped while impai red; both 
officers testified that Su smelled of alcohol and had red, watery, glassy 
eyes.  Officer Cadena’s testimony provides substantial evidence supporting 
Su’s OVUII conviction.  **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
22 
 III.  Standard of review 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to trial 
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence, 
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of 
evidence at issue.  When application of a particular 
evidentiary rule can  yield only one correct result, the 
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong 
standard.  However, the traditional abuse of discretion 
standard should be applied in the case of those rule s of 
evidence that require a “judgment call” on the part  of the 
trial court.  
 
Kealoha v. Cnty . of Hawaiʻi, 74 Haw. 308, 319 -20, 844 P.2d 670, 
676 (1993).   An abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court 
“clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant.”  State v. Kupihea , 80 Hawaiʻi 307, 312, 909 P.2d 
1122, 1127 (1996). 
IV.  Discussion  
 Defense counsel sought to impeach Officer Spiker through 
cross-examining him then introducing extrinsic evidence 
regarding  his testimony in Kuni, Lee, and Thomas under HRE Rule 
608(b), which allows the credibility of a witness to be attacked 
using “[s]pecific instances of conduct” that are “probative of 
untruthfulness.”  The relevant portion of HRE Rule 608(b) states 
the following:  
Specific instances of conduct.   Specific instances of the 
conduct of a witness, for the purpose of attacking the 
witness’ credibility, if probative of untruthfulness, may 
be inquired into on cross -examination of the witness and, 
in the discretion of the court, may be proved by extrinsi c 
evidence. . . .   
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
23 
 The original Commentary to HRE Rule 608(b) states that this 
subsection “allows cross -examination of the witness relative to 
specific collateral conduct to the extent that such conduct is 
relevant to veracity .”6 (Emphasis added .)  The Supplemental 
Commentary goes on to state that the intent of the rule is “to 
invest the trial judge with discretion to admit the extrinsic 
evidence in such a case, assuming the witness is confronted on 
cross-examination and denies th e material.”    
 Professor Bowman explains that HRE Rule 608(b) governs 
misbehavior other than criminal convictions, which are governed 
by HRE Rule 609.   Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
Manual § 608-2[1][A] at 6 -42 (2018 –2019 ed.) ( “Bowman”).  Bowman 
provides examples of the kinds of conduct we have deemed 
admissible under HRE Rule 608(b), which includes conduct 
regarding lies and falsifications.  Bowman, § 608-2[1][B] at   
 
6  The 1992 Supplemental Commentary to HRE Rule 608(b) states that the 
rule “allows cross -examination of a witness concerning specific instances of 
conduct that are relevant to the “trait of credibility. ” (Emphasis added.) 
This Reference to the word “trait” here should not confuse HRE Rule 608(b)  
with HRE Rule 608(a) that gener ally covers the “character trait ” of 
truthfulness or untruthfulness.  HRE Rule 608(a) provides:  
 
(a) Opinion and reputation evidence of character. The 
credibility of a witness may be attacked or supported by 
evidence in the form of opinion or reputation, b ut subject 
to these limitations:  
 (1) The evidence may refer only to character for 
truthfulness or untruthfulness, and  
 (2) Evidence of truthful character is admissible only after 
the character of the witness for truthfulness has been 
attacked by opinion or reputation evidence or otherwise.  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
24 
 6-42-43, citing, e.g., In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawaiʻi 443, 
465, 979 P.2d 39, 61 (1999)  (misrepresentation to probate court 
in application for probate of will and to administer decedent ’s 
estate), and Cozine v. Hawaiian Catamaran, Ltd. , 49 Haw. 77, 412 
P.2d 669 (1966)  (false affidavit).  As further explained in 
Bowman, “[t]he primary factor [in determining admissibility 
under HRE Rule 608(b)] is the relevance of the proffered 
impeaching material to affect the witness ’s credibility. ”  
Bowman, § 608-2[1][C] at 6 -43. 
 In examining  the ICA’s SDO, it is unclear wh at standard was 
used to review the trial court’s admissibility determination.  
The ICA stated that it “d[id] not disagree” with the trial court 
that the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas proceedings “did not constitute 
examples of untruthfulness under HRE Rule 608(b) .”  Su, SDO at 
5.  It then concluded that the district court “did not abuse its 
discretion by preventing further cross -examination of Officer 
Spiker on these incidents.”  Su, SDO at  6.    
 We take this opportunity to clarify that , under the plain 
language of HRE  Rule 608(b), admissibility of evidence under HRE 
Rule 608(b) involves a two -step inquiry:   (1) whether the 
specific conduct evidence proffered for the purpose of attacking 
the witness ’s credibility is probative of  untruthfulness, and, 
if so, (2) whether t he probative value of the evidence of the 
specific conduct is substantially outweighed by the danger of **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
25 (continued. . .)  
 unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumul ative evidence pursuant to HRE 
Rule 403.   An appellate court reviews the trial court’s two -step 
admissibility determination under the right/wrong standard as to 
the first step, and under the abuse of discretion standard as to 
the second step.   
 Thus, under the first step, a witness may generally be 
cross-examined7 about specific instances of conduct probative of 
 
7   However, when the “witness” is a defendant in a criminal case , allowing 
cross-examination about specific instances of conduct probative of 
untruthfulness may not survive an HRE Rule 403 balancing test becau se they 
are more prejudicial than probative .  State v. Culkin , 97 Hawaiʻi 206, 35 P.3d 
233 (2001), provides an instructive example.  In that case, the prosecution 
filed a notice of intent to confront the defendant with evidence of using 
another individual’ s name to open a checking account and rent a house.  97 
Hawaiʻi at 219, 35 P.3d at 246.  Several other false identification cards were 
discovered in the search of the house.   Id.  The defense argued admission of 
that evidence would be prejudicial because o f the defendant’s upcoming 
forgery trial stemming from his use of false identification in the other 
individual’s name to open a bank account and rent a house.  Id.  Before 
trial, the circuit court ruled that if the defendant took the stand, the 
prosecution  could question him about using the other individual’s name to 
open a bank account and rent a house, but it could not cross -examine him 
about the other false identification cards.   97 Hawaiʻi at 219-20, 35 P.3d at 
246-47.  The defendant took the stand and testified that he only posed for 
the picture for the false identification in the other individual’s name but 
did, in fact, open up a bank account and rent a house under that name.   97 
Hawaiʻi at 220, 35 P.3d at 247.   The circuit court allowed cross -examination 
as to the other false identification cards, then the defendant exercised his 
right against self -incrimination as to that line of questioning.  Id.  We 
initially held that the “possession of false identification cards , and 
assorted activities undertaken therewith, were probative of untruthfulness.”   
97 Hawaiʻi at 221, 35 P.3d at 248 .  We then noted the unfair prejudice 
engendered by compelling the defendant to assert his fifth amendment 
privilege in front of the jury.  Id.   We went on to hold  that “under the 
circumstances of this case, the circuit court abused its discretion in 
permitting the prosecution to cross -examine [the defendant] about multiple 
false identification cards discovered at his house with foreknowledg e that 
[the defendant] intended to invoke his fifth amendment privilege if 
questioned about them” because he had an upcoming trial on a forgery charge **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
26 
 credibility , if probative of untruthfulness .  A trial court’s 
decision to allow or preclude cross -examination  on specific 
instances of conduct , based upon relevanc e under HRE Rules 401 
and 402,8 is thus reviewed under the right/wrong standard.     
 An example of the erroneous admission of irrelevant 
specific instances of conduct occurred in State v. Stanley , 110 
Hawaiʻi 116, 129 P.3d 1144 (App. 2005).  There, t he ICA concluded 
that the trial court erred in allowing defense counsel to cross -
examine the complaining witness about instances in which the 
complaining witness stuck his middle finger at the defendant, as 
such conduct was not for the purpose of attacking the witness ’s  
credibility under HRE Rule 608(b) and “had nothing to do with 
dishonesty .”  110 Hawaii at 128, 129 P.3d at 1156.  
 An example of the erroneous preclusion of relevant specific 
instances of con duct occurred in State v. Estrada , 69 Haw. 204, 
738 P.2d 812 (1987).  In that case, defense counsel sought to 
cross-examine a complaining witness Maui Police Department 
 
(continued. . .) 
involving the false identification cards.  97 Hawaiʻi at 211, 219, 35 P.3d at 
238, 246.     
 
8  HRE Rule 401 provides, “‘Relevant evidence’ means evidence having any 
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be 
without the evidence.”  HRE Rule 402 provides,  “All relevant evidence is 
admissible, except as otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United 
States and the State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by other rules 
adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is not relevant is not 
admissible.” 
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
27 
 (“MPD”) police officer, Officer Taguma, alleging that a 
confidential HPD internal affai rs division (“IAD”) file would 
reveal that the officer lied in his application for employment 
with MPD.  69 Haw. at 2 11, 738 P.2d at 81 8.  The circuit court 
in that case reviewed the IAD file in camera, ruled it 
irrelevant, and sealed it, without the prosecutor or defense 
counsel ever viewing the file.  69 Haw. at 211, 738 P.2d at 818.  
This court concluded that Officer Taguma’s “alleged 
falsifications [on his application for employment with MPD] were 
relevant towards a determination of his credibility” and “should 
have been admitted under the guidelines established in HRE Rule 
608(b).”  69 Haw. at 219, 738 P.2d at 823.  We added that the 
finder of fact “should possess all relevant evidence” concerning 
the falsifications, and that it was “for the [finder of fact ] to 
decide how much weight to give the falsifications.”  Id.        
 Once confronted on cross -examination with specific 
instances of c onduct probative of untruthfulness , the witness 
may either admit or deny the misdeed.  We then turn to the 
second step of the HRE Rule 608(b) analysis with respect to the 
admission of extrinsic evidence regarding the specific instance 
of conduct.  Even when the witness admits the misdeed, pursuant 
to the plain language of HRE Rule 608(b), the court has 
discretion to permit or exclude extrinsic evidence of the 
misbehavior.  The admission of extrinsic evidence is subject to **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
28 
 the trial court’s balancing of the probative value of that 
evidence against the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of 
the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of 
undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of 
cumulative evidence, under HRE Rule 403.9  The trial court’s 
ruling on the admission of extrinsic evidence is thus reviewed 
for an abuse of discretion.   
 Applying the two -step analysis to this case, we note that 
the district court stopped at the first step of the HRE Rule 
608(b) analysis, concluding that no ne of the three specific 
instances of conduct were relevant and probative of Officer 
Spiker’s untruthfulness .  The ICA generally agreed.  In 
reviewing this determination de novo, we conclude that the 
district court erred in finding that the Kuni and Thomas 
proceedings were not probative of Officer Spiker’s credibility.  
As to the Lee proceeding, the district court correctly found the 
proffered evidence not relevant to, and probative of, Officer 
Spiker’s untruthfulness .   
 The district court erred in p recluding defense counsel from 
cross-examining Officer Spiker as to the Kuni ADLRO proceedings 
 
9  HRE Rule 403 provides, “Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of 
cumulative evidence.”  
 **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
29 
 because it was a specific instance of conduct clearly relevant 
to Officer Spiker ’s credibility  that was probative of 
untruthfulness .  The transcripts of the Kuni proceedings show 
that Officer Spiker submitted a license revocation form to 
ADLRO, which he signed, swearing and affirming that it was the 
same form  he gave to the defendant, Kuni.  On cross -examination, 
he admitted that he altered the form after having g iven it to 
Kuni and before submitting it to ADLRO .  The following 
transcript  shows that Officer Spiker submitted a falsely sworn 
statement to ADLRO:   
ATTORNEY BURK : [counsel for Kuni]:  Okay.  So the form that 
you issued, the form that you issued to Ms. Kuni is in fact 
not the form that you provided to the ADLRO?  It is not 
identical to the one you provided to ADLRO?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes.  
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Okay.  And the form that you issued or gave 
to the A[D]LRO, handed in to the ADLRO you had altered the 
form after giving it to Ms. Kuni, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  I believe so, yes . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Explain, if you have an explanation, or if 
you recall.  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  I can’t recall why I did that because 
normally I normally check it off and then make the copies 
but I can’t recall why, I know she initialed everything 
that she refused.  I just made an error on my part.  As I 
recall she di d initial a refusal. . . I guess it is just   
-– 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  But whenever, on the form when you swear 
and affirm that you handed that form to her, that is not in 
fact true then, correct?  
 
OFFICER SPIKER:  Yes, in this instance, yes, not true . 
 
ATTORNEY BURK:  Thank you.  No further questions.  
 
(Emphases added.)    **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
30 
  A law enforcement officer’s credibility is clearly called 
into question where he admits to submitting a falsely sworn 
document in an administrative proceeding due to a departure from 
his usua l practice.  Therefore, the district court erred in 
precluding cross -examination of Officer Spiker  on the Kuni ADLRO 
proceedings .  We also cannot say that such error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt, as the outcome of Su’s trial hinged 
upon the credibility of the two HPD witnesses against him.  See 
State v. Pond , 118 Hawaiʻi 452, 469, 193 P.3d 368 , 385 (2008) 
(holding trial court’s prec lusion of defendant’s cross -
examination of complaining witnesses as to her marijuana use was 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because the re was a 
reasonable possibility of a different trial outcome had the 
factfinder s been able to judge the credibili ty of the 
complaining witness upon cross -examination).   Thus, on this 
basis, Su's conviction must be vacated.  
 With respect to the Thomas proceedings, the still 
photographs of the video -recording apparently show that, 
contrary to Officer Spiker’s police re port and trial testimony, 
Thomas did not have his fists clenched and was not throwing 
punches.  Thus, the Thomas proceedings were relevant to Officer 
Spiker’s credibility  and probative of untruthfulness .    **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
31 
  With regard to the Lee proceedings, the trial co urt simply 
rejected Officer Spiker’s estimates of distance and speed as 
“not mak[ing] sense,” as related below:      
Looking in the light most favorable to State and resting 
slowly upon the testimony of Officer Spiker at this point 
in time, the Court agree s with defense counsel.  Officer 
Spiker’s testimony simply does not make sense as he was -- 
he testified that she crossed the double solid line three 
to five yards, which is nine to fifteen feet, at 
approximately 20 yards away from him in the opposite 
direction. 
 And if she was going the speed limit, and even if he 
was going at 25 miles an hour, within seconds that places 
her not only in the direct lane oncoming Officer Spiker, 
but at 15 feet at his outside estimate would place her in 
the -- partially the middle lane.  So and in the event at 
that speed and if we listen to Officer Spiker and that she 
was at that distance for four to eight seconds simply 
doesn’t make physical sense.  
 As a result, the Court cannot take his testimony and 
grants the motion for ju dgment of acquittal.  
 
Indeed, in the Lee case, Officer Spiker conceded on cross -
examination that he was “estimating,” “c[ould]n’t speculate” as 
to his speed, and “c[ould]n’t recall” Lee’s speed.   Thus, the 
district court did not err in disallowing use of t his evidence 
in cross -examining Officer Spiker.  The proffered evidence was 
not relevant to Officer Spiker ’s credibility and was therefore 
inadmissible under HRE Rule 608(b).  
 Thus, on remand, based on the first step of the HRE Rule 
608(b) analysis, Su is entitled to cross -examine Officer Spiker 
as to the Kuni and Thomas matters.  The extent of the cross -
examination, as well as the admissibility of extrinsic evidence , 
if offered, is subject to a n HRE Rule 403 analysis.   **  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  **  
 
32 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson    
  
  
  
  
  Lastly, we address the ICA’s statement that the district 
court “had ‘in its possession sufficient information to appraise 
the biases and motivations of the witness’ and did not abuse its 
discretion by preventing further cross -examination of Officer 
Spiker” concerning his testimony in the Kuni, Lee, and Thomas 
proceedings.  Su, SDO at 6.  To the extent the ICA suggests that 
the district court reached its judgment by taking into account 
evidence it had excluded, such suggestion is w rong.  It is “well 
established that a judge [in a bench trial] is presumed not to 
be influenced by incompetent evidence.”  State v. Vliet , 91 
Hawaiʻi 288, 298, 983 P.2d 189, 199 (1999).    
V.  Conclusion  
 For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the ICA’s July 2, 2019 
Judgment on Appeal, as well as the district court’s August 2, 
2018 Judgment.  This case is remanded to the district court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
Jonathan Burge 
for petitioner  
    
Sonja P. McCullen
for respondent   
 
    
 
    