   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
---o0o--- 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
AIVEN ANGEI, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-18-0000940 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000940; CR. NO. 1CPC-18-0000163) 
MARCH 15, 2023 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND McKENNA, JJ., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE TO‘ OTO‘O, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY,
WITH WILSON, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.  
I. INTRODUCTION
This case requires us to consider the application of 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 327C-1 (2010) to a prosecution 
for murder.  We also consider whether the trial court erred in 
declining to instruct the jury on Reckless Endangering in the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000940
15-MAR-2023
07:58 AM
Dkt. 20 OPA 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
2 
 Second Degree (Reckless Endangering Second) as an included 
offense. 
 
Aiven Angei was charged with Murder in the Second 
Degree after an altercation with Jonathan Makana Kanui-Flores 
that ended with Kanui-Flores being stabbed multiple times.  A 
jury in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) 
found Angei guilty of the lesser included offense of 
Manslaughter based on reckless conduct (Reckless Manslaughter), and the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the 
conviction.  
 Angei argues that the requirements of HRS § 327C-1 
apply to all criminal cases involving death, including his case.  
We disagree.  As we held in State v. Moon, No. SCAP-19-714, 2023 
WL 1878104 (Haw. Feb. 10, 2023), as corrected (Feb. 17, 2023), 
this statute applies in cases where a death determination – that 
is, where a “generally medically recognized criteria of 
determining the occurrence of death” – is required or implicated.  
Id. at *1.  Here, a death determination was neither required nor 
implicated because the State and Angei stipulated that Kanui-Flores was declared brain dead and cardiac dead, and that Kanui-
Flores was approved for organ donation.  Moreover, the medical 
examiner opined that Kanui-Flores died as result of a stab wound 
that penetrated his skull and entered his brain.  Thus, there 
was sufficient evidence for a reasonable juror to conclude that  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
3 
 death was proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  Accordingly, the  
circuit court did not e
rr in denying Angei’s motion for judgment 
of acquittal.   Angei also contends that the circuit court erred in 
failing to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense of Reckless Endangering Second.  We disagree.  As set forth below, 
there was no rational basis in the evidence to instruct the jury 
on that offense, and even if the circuit court did somehow err, any such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   
We accordingly affirm the ICA’s October 5, 2020 
Judgment on Appeal, which affirmed the circuit court’s 
November 20, 2018 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.   
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Circuit Court Proceedings
1 
 A grand jury indicted Angei for Murder in the Second 
Degree in violation of HRS § 707-701.5 (2014).2  The testimony of 
several of the main witnesses is summarized below.3  
                     
 1  The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
 
2  HRS § 707- 701.5 provides: 
 
Murder in the second degree.   (1) Except as provided in section 
707
-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the second 
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death 
of another person. 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which 
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as 
provided in section 706- 656.
 
 
3  The other evidence included surveillance footage, and DNA 
evidence that linked Angei to a cap and slippers found at the scene.   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
4 
 Michael Magbaleta stated that on January 28, 2018 at 
2:30 a.m., a man approached him near a 7-Eleven in Waipahu 
asking “to buy pakalolo.”4  Magbaleta told the man that he 
“d[idn’t] use that” and “to go away.”  The man then walked toward the 7-Eleven and approached two individuals who had 
exited.  Magbaleta testified that he had seen the man “[p]lenty 
times,” “almost . . . daily,” and identified the man as Angei.  
Magbaleta testified that he heard Angei asking the two customers “to buy a pakalolo again.”  The customers yelled at Angei, 
telling him “to go away, and then suddenly, they start[ed] 
fighting.”  Magbaleta observed Angei and one of the customers 
“punching each other”; the other customer stood on the side 
watching.  The fight was “fast” and after it was over, Magbaleta 
saw Angei run away.  Magbaleta testified that he heard the 
customer who had watched the fight ask the other customer if he 
was okay and call 911, and Magbaleta saw the ambulance arrive.  
The next day, a detective approached Magbaleta about the incident, and he told the detective what he had observed and 
participated in a field lineup where he identified Angei.   
Syres Kauai testified that, on the morning of January 
28, 2018, he and his friend, Kanui-Flores, went to 7-Eleven in 
Waipahu to buy food and cigarettes after drinking at a club.  
                     
4  “Pakalolo” is the Hawaiian word for marijuana.  Mary Kawena Pukui 
& Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 304 (2d ed. 1986).  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
5 
 After making their purchases, they exited 7-Eleven and were 
approached by a Micronesian man in his early- or mid-twenties, 
who asked Kauai to buy marijuana.  Kauai told the man to “get 
out of here, do I look like I sell weed?”  The man responded by 
mumbling and approaching 
Kauai with his left hand in his pocket.
Kauai then told the man to “get the fuck out of here, I don’t --I don’t sell weed” and to “beat it” a few times, but the man 
continued mumbling and staring at Kauai.  Kanui-Flores then approached the man, saying, “did you hear what my friend said, 
he said for [you to] beat it, and shoved the guy.”   The man 
stumbled, dropping his backpack, and then got up with a knife – which Kauai thought might be a four-inch switchblade – in his 
hand.   5   
According to Kauai, the man and Kanui-Flores then went 
into the parking lot of 7-Eleven and started exchanging blows 
“one for one.”  During the fight, the man stabbed Kanui-Flores.  
Kauai watched the fight from eight feet away and called the police.  When Kauai yelled for the man and Kanui-Flores to stop, 
the men separated, and the man grabbed his backpack and ran.  
Kauai identified the man in the altercation as Angei.  
 
Kanui-Flores “was kind of in a daze,” and Kauai 
brought him to the sidewalk.  After seeing blood coming from 
                     
5  On cross- examination, Kauai acknowledged that he had told police 
that Kanui- Flores had hit Angei approximately ten times.  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
6 
 Kanui-Flores’s head and the back of his right shoulder, Kauai 
realized that Kanui-Flores was seriously injured.  Kauai called 
for an ambulance and tried to “plug . . . the stab wounds” and 
keep Kanui-Flores awake until the ambulance arrived.  He also 
gave a police officer a description of the suspect.   
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Ryan Seto 
responded to the incident.  He testified that when he arrived at 
the scene he saw two men outside 7-Eleven.  He verbally identified the person lying on the ground as Kanui-Flores, and 
the person tending to Kanui-Flores as Kauai.  Officer Seto 
received a description of the suspect from Kauai: “[a] 
Micronesian male wearing long sleeves, a black hat, slippers, 
and backpack.”  Officer Seto relayed this description to other 
officers in the area over the police radio, but they could not 
locate the suspect.
6   
HPD Officer Che-Wai Lau testified that on January 28, 
2018 at 2:55 a.m., he was dispatched to the Queen’s Medical Center where he observed Kanui-Flores “being worked on by the 
hospital personnel for various injuries.”  Officer Lau 
testified 
that Kanui-Flores’s “eyes, even though they were open, they were 
                     
6  Officers eventually detained Angei on January 29, 2018.  He had a 
backpack, cell phone, earphones, a hat, and slippers.  Officers then created 
a field lineup and drove Magbaleta to their lineup to see if he recognized Angei.  Magbaleta identified Angei as the man involved in the fight the 
previous day, and Angei was arrested.   
    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
7 
    just gazing out into seemingly nowhere, essentially.”  Kanui-
Flores appeared unable to communicate.  On cross-examination, 
Officer Lau testified that he “believe[d]” Kanui-Flores was 
still alive when he went into the room where hospital personnel 
were treating him, but he only stayed in the room “a few minutes 
at the most.”   
Kauai testified that he did not see Kanui-Flores the 
night Kanui-Flores went to the hospital.  When Kauai 
went to the 
hospital to visit Kanui-Flores, he saw Kanui-Flores’s family and 
“found out they were going to pull the plug.”  He had a chance 
to see Kanui-Flores “before his family decided to pull the 
plug.”7   
 Both the State and Angei stipulated to the following 
written statement, which was read to the jury: 
It is hereby stipulated and agreed by and between the 
State of Hawai‘ i and the defendant that the following facts 
may be admitted into evidence:   
 
1.  Cherylee Chang, M.D. is a medical doctor who is 
licensed to practice medicine in the State of Hawai
‘i.   
 
 Dr. Chang’s license was valid on January 29, 2018.   
 
Dr. Chang is qualified to determine whether a person 
is deceased.   
 
2.
  On January 29, 2018, at approximately 8:15 a.m., 
Dr. Chang made a brain death pronouncement for Jonathan 
                     
 7  The exact timing of Kauai’s visit is not clear from the record.  
Kauai testified that he visited when Kanui- Flores’s family was “just about to 
pull the plug.”  Since Kauai did not go to the hospital on the night Kanui-
Flores was admitted (which was around 3 a.m. on January 28), the visit would have occurred between the morning of January 28 and 11:53 a.m. on January 29, 
when Kanui- Flores was declared dead.    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
8 
 Makana Kanui- Flores at Queen’s Medical Center.   
 
3.  An apnea test was performed on January 29, 2018, 
at approximately 11:53 a.m. by Dr. Chang, which was listed as the time of death.   
 
4.  On January 29, 2018, at approximately 5:00 p.m., 
investigator Casey Nuesca responded to Queen’s Medical 
Center to evaluate the decedent’s body. 
   
Dr. Masahiko Kobayashi approved organ donation.    
The decedent’s body was left in the NICU (sic), and 
kept on ventilator awaiting organ donation performed by 
Legacy of Life Hawai‘ i.   
 
And on January 29, 2018, at approximately 11:53 a.m., 
Alice Kanui- Flores was notified by staff of John Kanui-
Flores and identified the body. 
   
On January 30, 2018, at approximately 5:56 p.m., the 
body was transferred to the Queen’s Medical Center 
operating room.  Dr. Jacqueline Lee pronounced the decedent 
cardiac dead prior to organ donation. 
   
7.  On January 30, 2018, at approximately 8:25 p.m., 
medical examiner investigator Casey Nuesca secured Jonathan 
Makana Kanui- Flores’s body in a blue body bag and sealed 
the bag with lock No. 13032. 
  
This was done in the presence of HPD Officer Steven 
Lee.   
 
8.  Jonathan Makana Kanui- Flores’s body arrived at 
the City and County of Honolulu morgue on January 30, 2018, 
at approximately 8:50 p.m. without incident or mishap.  
  The body was placed into crypt No. 5 for 
refrigeration and locked by investigator Casey Nuesca in presence of APT transporter J. Naki.
8  
 
Dr. Christopher Happy, Chief Medical Examiner for the 
City and County of Honolulu, testified that Kanui-Flores was 
“pronounced dead” on January 29, 2018 at Queen’s Medical Center by Dr. Chang.  Two days later, he performed an autopsy on Kanui-
                     
 8  The numbering of the statements in the stipulation as read to the 
jury skips from 4 to 7, omitting 5 and 6.  There are minor non- substantive 
differences between the written stipulation and what was read to the jury. 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
9 
  Flores.  He described various injuries to Kanui-Flores’s body.  
 
The wounds included “a penetrating stab wound of the 
left temple,” in which “the knife went through his skull” and 
into the brain to a depth of an inch to an inch and a half.  
They also included “an incised wound of the lateral left neck,” 
“two incised wounds of the left and right shoulders,” “a 
perforating stab wound of the left shoulder,” “a penetrating 
stab wound of the left superior shoulder,” “an incised wound of the left lateral chest or flank area,” “an incised wound[] 
of . . . the palm side -- of the left wrist,” and a blunt force 
injury (i.e., a bruise or contusion) on the back of the left 
hand.
9  He testified that the “penetrating stab wound” to Kanui-
Flores’s left temple was “a fatal wound.”  Based on his autopsy and the investigative and historical information available to 
him, Dr. Happy concluded that the cause of Kanui-Flores’s death 
was “stab wounds of the head and torso.”   
On cross-examination, Angei’s attorney did not 
question Dr. Happy about the cause of Kanui-Flores’s death.  Instead, his questions focused on Kanui-Flores’s blood-alcohol 
content, how many of Kanui-Flores’s wounds were “puncture-type 
wounds” as opposed to scratches, and whether Dr. Happy saw 
                     
9  Dr. Happy explained that a stab wound is “a sharp force injury 
that is deeper than it is long on the skin,” and an incised wound is an 
injury that is “longer than it is deep on the skin.”  While a penetrating 
wound “go[es] into” something, a “perforating” wound “go[es] through” it.    
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
10 
 (. . . continued) documentation of the organs Kanui-Flores had donated.   
After the State rested, Angei moved for judgment of 
acquittal, arguing that “the State ha[d not] proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Mr. Flores’s death was in accordance with 
the laws . . . of this State.”  According to Angei, when a 
person is on artificial means of support for the purposes of 
organ removal, HRS § 327C-1 required that “two physicians” 
with 
certain credentials “come to the conclusion that cessation of 
all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem, has 
occurred.”  This conclusion must be made before the removal of 
artificial support, and “both of these doctors need to submit a 
written statement for the record” of their conclusion.   
According to Angei, under HRS § 327C-1, these 
requirements apply to “all deaths under the circumstances that 
[HRS § 327C-1] describes” and, thus, applied here.  But the 
State failed to meet these requirements.  One doctor testified 
that Kanui-Flores “was brain dead,” and the other that “it was cardiac failure.”  Neither “determined that the brain . . . , 
including the brainstem, had ceased to function. . . .”  
Moreover, there was “no testimony” of these pronouncements of 
death or that they had occurred before Kanui-Flores was taken 
off life support.
10  Angei further argued, “we don’t have any 
                     
10  In his motion for judgment of acquittal, Angei also argued that 
there was “some evidence, not very much, that . . . somebody was appointed a  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
11 
 testimony or evidence relating to [Kanui-Flores’s] actual 
condition at the time when they decide to harvest his organs”, 
and that it was the State’s burden – not Angei’s – to produce 
such evidence.   
The State argued that the requirements under HRS § 
327C-1 are “safeguards in place by law” for organ donations, but 
they do not “have any effect on the State’s proving the elements 
at least to a prima facie case that this defendant caused the death of Jonathan Kanui-Flores.”  Moreover, the State contended 
it had presented evidence through the stipulation that Kanui-
Flores was declared brain dead and approved for organ donation, 
and this was enough to make a prima facie case.   
Angei moved for a judgment of acquittal and filed a 
memorandum of law in support.  In addition to reiterating 
earlier arguments, Angei argued that the State “ha[d] not 
prove[n] beyond a reasonable doubt that [he was] the cause of 
[Kanui-Flores’s] death”:
11 
The decedent Jonathan Makana Kanui- Flores was alive 
when placed in the custody of the Queen’s Medical Center on 
January 28, 2018.  
  
                                                                  
(continued . . .) 
surrogate to make a decision to pull the plug” on Kanui- Flores.  In such 
situations, HRS Chapter 327E requires that “[c]ertain tasks . . . occur”; 
there was no evidence that such tasks occurred here.  Moreover, pursuant to 
HRS § 327E- 13 (2010), the death here should not be considered a homicide.   
 
11  Angei’s Memorandum of Law in Support of Judgment of Acquittal 
also contained arguments that the State failed to meet the requirements under 
HRS Chapter 327E.   
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
12 
 Aiven Angei did not have a hand in the intentional or 
knowing cause of the death, i.e., the homicide of Jonathan 
Makana Kanui- Flores for which he is charged.  
  
Rather than keeping the decedent “alive”, a decision 
was made to “pull the plug” by the family as testified to 
by Syres Kauai.  No other evidence contradicts this 
evidence.  Christopher Happy, the medical examiner, 
testified about the “harvesting” of Kanui-Flores’ organs, 
which was done, resulting in his death.  Happy was not in a 
position to determine with [sic] Kanui-Flores was brain 
dead. 
 
The court denied the motion.  The court considered HRS 
§§ 701-114 (2014)12 and 701-117 (2014),13 and Hawai‘ i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 306(b) (2018)(last amended 1980).14  It then 
concluded that the State had established a prima facie case for 
each material element of the offense of murder.  Based on the 
evidence presented at trial (specifically, the stipulation 
regarding Kanui-Flores’s brain death and cardiac death), the 
                     
12  HRS § 701- 114 states: 
 
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  (1) Except as otherwise 
provided in section 701- 115, no person may be convicted of an 
offense unless 
the following are proved beyond a reasonable doubt:  
(a) Each element of the offense; 
(b) The state of mind required to establish each element 
of the offense;
 
(c) Facts establishing jurisdiction; 
(d) Facts establishing venue; and 
(e) Facts establishing that the offense was committed within the time period specified in section 701- 108. 
 (2) In the absence of the proof required by subsection 
(1), the innocence of the defendant is presumed.
 
 
13  HRS § 701- 117 states: “ Prima facie evidence of a fact is evidence 
which, if accepted in its entirety by the trier of fact, is sufficient to prove the fact.  Prima facie evidence provisions in this Code are governed by 
section 626- 1, rule 306.” 
 
14  HRE Rule 306(b) states: “ Presumptions against the State.   Except 
as otherwise provided by statute, in criminal proceedings, presumptions against the State, recognized at common law or created by statute, impose on 
the State either (1) the burden of producing evidence, or (2) the burden of 
proof.”  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
13 
 court found that “there is sufficient evidence for a reasonable 
juror to conclude that death has been proven beyond a reasonable 
doubt.”  The court further explained that even if HRS § 327C-1 
applied and was violated, there was no “authority” to indicate 
the consequence of this violation.  Absent such an authority, 
the court concluded it was “not authorized by law” to penalize 
the State.   
Angei submitted a proposed jury instruction on 
Reckless Endangering Second as a lesser included offense of Murder in the Second Degree.  Angei argued, 
I think this could comport with the conduct of my client, 
and therefore I think it’ s consistent with any evidence 
standard of what he did or didn’ t do which would permit 
this instruction to be given, that is, engaged in reckless behavior which created a risk of danger or danger of death 
— put a person in danger of death or serious bodily injury, 
so I think that that is — comports with the facts in this 
case. 
 
The State objected, and the court refused the 
instruction over Angei’s objection.15   
Angei testified in his own defense that on January 28, 
2018, at 2:30 a.m., he was at home babysitting his sister’s 
child; thus, he was not the person involved in Kanui-Flores’s 
death.  On cross-examination, he testified that his residence 
was not very far from where officers stopped him.  He admitted 
to seeing Magbaleta “a few times.”  But he insisted that he was 
                     
15  Neither party proposed, nor did the court give, a jury 
instruction that defined death. 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
14 
 not the man in HPD’s pictures of the possible suspect.  He also 
testified that he had never seen nor touched the cap or slippers 
recovered at the scene; neither were his.  When asked if he had 
any injuries when he was arrested on January 29, he responded, 
“I didn’t sustain any injury.”   
The defense then rested, and Angei renewed his motion 
for judgment of acquittal.  The court denied the renewed motion.   
The court instructed the jury on Murder in the Second 
Degree and the following lesser included offenses: Manslaughter (Recklessly Causing Death), Assault in the First Degree, Assault 
in the Second Degree (Serious Bodily Injury or Substantial 
Bodily Injury), and Assault in the Third Degree.  The jury was 
also instructed on the following defenses: mutual consent as a 
defense for Assault in the Third Degree, and self-defense as a 
defense for Murder in the Second Degree and its lesser included 
offenses.   
During the State’s closing, the State argued that “all 
the evidence, the witnesses, the scientific evidence, physical evidence, video evidence, all point to one person in this case.”  
The State argued that it had carried its burden of proof as to 
the two substantive elements of Second Degree Murder – “Did [the] 
defendant intentionally or knowingly engage in conduct” and “[b]y engaging in that conduct did he intentionally or knowingly 
cause the death of another person.”  The State concluded that  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
15 
 the jury should find Angei guilty as charged of Second Degree 
Murder.   
In turn, Angei’s closing argued that “there are 
several ways to look at the evidence that was produced.”  First, 
Angei noted that “despite what the evidence may show, or some of 
the evidence may show, there is some evidence that could be 
interpreted to show that in fact it wasn’t him.”  Even if it was 
him, Angei argued that the State had failed to prove intent, asserting that “[j]ust because the guy died, it doesn’t mean 
what force he used was deadly.  It was self-protective force.”  
Angei contended that the assailant’s conduct “was reasonable 
because of how it ended,” noting that “when [Syres] said stop, 
he stopped.”  “He didn’t go up to him and stab[] him more, or 
turn around and try and stab Syres.”   
The jury found Angei guilty of the lesser included 
offense of Manslaughter (Recklessly Causing Death) in violation 
of HRS § 707-702(1)(a) (2014).
16  He was sentenced to twenty 
years of imprisonment.  Angei timely filed a notice of appeal.  
B. ICA Proceedings 
On appeal, Angei argued that the circuit court erred 
in two respects: (1) by not instructing the jury on the lesser 
                     
16  HRS § 707- 702(1)(a) states: “ A person commits the offense of 
manslaughter if: (a) The person recklessly causes the death of another 
person . . . .”   
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
16 
 included offense of Reckless Endangering Second under HRS § 707-
714(1)(a) (2014)  and (2) by denying his motion for judgment of 
acquittal despite the State’s failure to meet the requirements of HRS § 327(c)(1).   17
First, Angei argued that Reckless Endangering Second 
is a lesser included offense of Murder in the Second Degree.  
Under HRS § 701-109(4)(c) (2014), a lesser included offense 
“differs from the offense charged only in the respect that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same person, 
property, or public interest or a different state of mind 
indicating lesser degree of culpability suffices to establish 
its commission.”  Angei contended that these requirements were 
met here because Reckless Endangering Second entails recklessly 
placing another person in danger of death.  “Hence, reckless 
endangering in the second degree ‘differs’ by having . . . a 
lesser state of mind requirement from murder, the offense 
charged.”   
Angei then argued that the jury should have been 
instructed on Reckless Endangering Second because there was a “rational basis” in the evidence for the jury to acquit Angei of 
Murder in the Second Degree and convict him of Reckless 
                     
17  HRS § 707- 714(1)(a) states: “A person commits the offense of 
reckless endangering in the second degree if the person: (a) Engages in 
conduct that recklessly places another person in danger of death or serious 
bodily injury . . . .” 
  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
17 
 Endangering Second instead.  “The facts show that the decedent 
was the aggressor and that [Angei] was struck at least 10 times 
prior to bring[ing] his knife out, which was used after being 
struck on each time [thereafter].”  Angei moreover argued that 
by convicting him of Reckless Manslaughter 
instead of Murder in 
the Second Degree, “the jury did not find that pulling out a knife and using it was an intentional or knowing act that 
resulted in Kanui-Flores’[s] death.”   
Second, Angei argued that that State did “not [meet] 
its burden of proof regarding Kanui-Flores[’s] cause of death.” Angei argued that under the plain and unambiguous language of 
HRS § 327C-1, the requirements of that statute applied to this 
case, “a ‘criminal action.’”  Angei noted that: 
In this case, two doctors licensed to practice medicine made 
pronouncements regarding Kanui- Flores’[s] death.  Neither are 
described [in the parties’ written stipulation] as an ‘attending physician’ or an ‘osteopathic physician.’  While Dr. Chang made a 
brain death pronouncement, Dr. Lee pronounced Kanui- Flores 
‘cardiac dead.’  Their pronouncements were not memorialized by 
signed statements as required by statute. 
 
(Citations omitted.)   
Since “[t]he State did not present evidence that 
comports with the requirements of HRS Chapter 327C,” the State 
did not satisfy its burden of proof.   
 In a Summary Disposition Order, the ICA affirmed the 
circuit court’s judgment.  Regarding the jury instruction, the ICA first concluded that, “[c]onsidering all factors,” Reckless 
Endangering Second is a lesser included offense of Murder in the  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
18 
 Second Degree.  The ICA then considered “whether there was a 
rational basis in the evidence in this case to support an 
instruction on the lesser included offense of Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree.”  Analogizing to its decision 
in State v. Magbulos, 141 Hawai
‘i 483, 413 P.3d 387 (App. 2018), 
the ICA determined that there was “no reasonable possibility 
that the circuit court’s failure to instruct on Reckless 
Endangering in the Second Degree affected the outcome of this 
case.”  The ICA explained: 
As in Magbulos, the jury was not faced with an “all or 
nothing” choice between the guilty verdict and a “complete 
acquittal” because the jury had the option of finding Angei 
guilty of lesser included offenses extending to multiple levels below the charged offense, but chose instead to find 
him guilty of Reckless Manslaughter.  It “strains 
credulity” to believe that the jury who found Angei guilty 
of Reckless Manslaughter and rejected finding him guilty of 
any of the lesser included offenses of first- , second- , and 
third-degree assault, might reasonably have found him 
guilty of the lower- level offense of Reckless Endangering 
in the Second Degree if instructed on this offense.   
 
(Quoting Magbulos, 141 Hawai‘ i at 499, 413 P.3d at 403.)18 
  Second, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did 
not err in denying Angei’s motion for judgment of acquittal.  
The ICA reasoned that there was no merit to Angei’s argument: 
[N]owhere in the statute or the chapter in which it appears 
does it describe any consequences for a failure to comply 
with its outlined procedure for the determination of death, 
and what effect, if any, any such violation may have on 
criminal proceedings involving an individual’s death.  
Neither the statute nor the chapter in which it appears requires compliance with the procedure in proving the death 
                     
18  The ICA relied solely on the Magbulos analysis and did not 
consider whether there was an evidentiary basis that would support the 
instruction for Reckless Endangering Second.   
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
19 
 of an individual for the purpose of proving an element of a 
criminal offense.  There is no requirement that the State 
prove compliance with HRS chapter 327C in order to make a prima facie case of a decedent’s death as an element of an 
offense for which a defendant is on trial.   
 
  Instead, the ICA held that there was sufficient 
evidence in the record to support a prima facie case, 
specifically that “Angei caused the decedent’s death.” 
C. Supreme Court Proceedings 
Angei’s application for writ of certiorari presents 
two questions: (1) whether the ICA gravely erred by not finding that the trial court erred by not instructing the jury regarding 
Reckless Endangering Second, and (2) whether the ICA gravely 
erred in affirming the trial court’s denial of Angei’s motion 
for judgment of acquittal.  
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Jury Instructions 
This court has held that “[w]hen jury instructions or 
the omission thereof are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the 
instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent or 
misleading.”  State v. Pecpec, 127 Hawai‘i 20, 32 , 
276 P.3d 589, 601 (2012).  
“[J]ury instructions on lesser-included offenses must 
be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a 
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
20 
 convicting the defendant of the included offense.”  State v. 
Flores, 131 Hawaiʻ i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 (2013) (citing 
State v. Stenger, 122 Hawaiʻi 271, 296, 226 P.3d 441, 466 (2010)).  
B. Statutory Interpretation 
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions 
of law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  
Nakamoto v. Kawauchi, 142 Hawai
ʻi 259, 268, 418 P.3d 600, 609 
(2018). 
C. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal 
When reviewing a motion for judgment of acquittal, we 
employ the same standard that a trial court applies to such 
a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution and in full 
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the 
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so 
that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  Sufficient evidence to support a prima 
facie case requires “substantial evidence” as to every material element of the offense charged.  State v. Eastman, 
81 Hawaiʻ i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996).  “Substantial 
evidence” as to every material element of the offense 
charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality 
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion.  Id. 
 Under such a review, 
we give “full play to the right of the fact finder to 
determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw 
justifiable inferences of fact.”  State v. Yabusaki, 58 Haw. 
404, 411, 570 P.2d 844, 848 (1977). 
 
State v. Jhun, 83 Hawaiʻ i 472, 481, 927 P.2d 1355, 1364 (1996) 
(Citation omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court Properly Denied Angei’s Motion for 
Judgment of Acquittal because HRS § 327C-1 Does Not Apply 
to the Circumstances of this Case 
 
Angei argues that he was entitled to a judgment of  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
21 
 (. . . continued) acquittal because the State failed to prove the element of death
in conformity with HRS § 327C-1.   Angei bases his argument on 19 
                     
19 HRS § 327C-1 states: 
 
Determination of death. (a) Except as provided in 
subsection (b), a person shall be considered dead if, in 
the announced opinion of a physician or osteopathic 
physician licensed under part I of chapter 453, physician 
or osteopathic physician excepted from licensure by section 453
-2(b)(3), physician assistant licensed under chapter 453, 
or registered nurse licensed under chapter 457, based on ordinary standards of current medical practice, the person 
has experienced irreversible cessation of spontaneous 
respiratory and circulatory functions.  Death will have 
occurred at the time when the irreversible cessation of the 
functions first coincided. 
 (b) In the event that artificial means of support 
preclude a determination that respiratory and circulatory functions have 
ceased, a person shall be considered dead if, 
in the opinion of an attending physician or osteopathic 
physician licensed under part I of chapter 453, or 
attending physician or osteopathic physician excepted from 
licensure by section 453- 2(b)(3), and of a consulting 
physician or osteopathic physician licensed under part I of 
chapter 453, or consulting physician or osteopathic 
physician excepted from licensure by section 453- 2(b)(3), 
based on ordinary standards of current medical practice, the person has experienced irreversible cessation of all 
functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem.  The opinions of the physicians or osteopathic physicians 
shall be evidenced by signed statements.  Death will have 
occurred at the time when the irreversible cessation of all 
functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem, 
first occurred.  Death shall be pronounced before artificial means of support are withdrawn and before any 
vital organ is removed for purposes of transplantation. 
 (c) When a part of a donor is used for direct organ 
transplantation under chapter 327, and the donor's death is established by determining that the donor experienced irreversible 
cessation of all functions of the entire brain, 
including the brain stem, the determination shall only be made under subsection (b).  The determination of death in 
all other cases shall be made under subsection (a).  The 
physicians or osteopathic physicians making the determination of death shall not participate in the 
procedures for removing or transplanting a part, or in the 
care of any recipient. 
 (d) All death determinations in the State shall be 
made pursuant to this section and shall apply to all purposes, including but not limited to civil and criminal 
actions, any laws to the contrary notwithstanding; provided 
that presumptive deaths under the Uniform Probate Code  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
22 
 the plain language of HRS § 327C-1(d), which states that HRS § 
327C-1 applies to “all purposes” in “criminal actions, a
ny laws 
to the contrary notwithstanding.”  Angei interprets this to mean that HRS § 327C-1 applies “to all criminal cases involving 
death,” including his case.   
We disagree.  In our recent decision in Moon, 2023 WL 
1878104, at *7, we held: 
Under the plain language of HRS § 327C- 1, specifically the 
title and subsection (d), this statute applies to 
“[d]etermination[s] of death” or “death determinations.”  
While these terms, viewed in isolation, could apply to all 
criminal cases involving death, when viewed in context, it 
is clear they are terms of art intended to apply to more 
limited circumstances where the exact time or occurrence of 
death is necessarily at issue or undetermined. 
 
Here, such a death determination was not necessary; 
“viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the trier 
of fact,” there was substantial evidence to support a prima 
facie case of death.  Jhun, 83 Hawaiʻ i at 483, 927 P.2d at 1366.  
Kauai, the decedent’s friend, testified that Angei used a four-
                                                                  
(continued . . .) 
shall not be affected by this section. 
 (e) The director of health may convene in every odd -
numbered year, a committee which shall be composed of representatives of appropriate general and specialized 
medical professional organizations, licensed attorneys, and members of the public.  The committee shall review medical 
practice, legal developments, and other appropriate matters 
to determine the continuing viability of this section, and 
shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations 
to the legislature, prior to the convening of the regular session held in each even- numbered year. 
 
(Emphasis added.)  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
23 
 inch switchblade to stab the decedent multiple times as the two 
exchanged blows.  When the fight ended and Angei fled, Kauai 
approached the decedent and observed stab wounds in Kanui-
Flores’s head and right shoulder.  As to the events that 
followed, the parties stipulated that on January 29, 2018, Dr. 
Chang pronounced the decedent brain dead, and Dr. Lee pronounced 
him cardiac dead the following day.  Dr. Happy, the chief 
medical examiner for the City and County of Honolulu who conducted the decedent’s autopsy, also testified that the 
“penetrating stab wound” to Kanui-Flores’s left temple was “a 
fatal wound,” and that the cause of Kanui-Flores’s death was 
“stab wounds of the head and torso.”  Thus, there was sufficient 
evidence in the record to support the jury finding that Kanui-
Flores was dead.   
Angei nevertheless raises an issue as to causation, 
first by suggesting that “the ‘harvesting’ of Kanui-Flores’[s] 
organs . . . result[ed] in his death,” then by arguing that the jury should have been instructed on causation at trial. 
 
Causation becomes an issue if there is evidence that such a decision by a family member or a physician may have caused the 
death of the decedent.  See State v. Abella, 145 Hawai‘i 541, 558, 
454 P.3d 482, 499 (2019).  In Abella, for instance, we held that 
jury instructions on causation and intervening actions were 
warranted in light of “evidence suggesting that the prognosis  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
24 
 for the victim was uncertain at the time the life support was 
discontinued.”  Id. at 561, 454 P.3d at 502.   
The defendant in Abella was convicted of manslaughter 
after he severely beat the decedent.  Id. at 543, 454 P.3d at 
484.  The decedent was in a comatose state for more than a week before he was removed from life support and declared dead.  Id.  
The following evidence of an intervening cause of the decedent’s death (i.e., the removal of life support) was adduced at trial: “evidence of [the decedent’s] daily improvements after his 
surgery, showing that [the decedent] could reach toward stimuli 
and open his eyes in response to voice, that he was becoming 
more alert, and that his condition was not worsening”; “[the 
treating neurosurgeon’s] testimony that it was ‘probably 
possible’ that [the decedent] could have regained independent 
breathing”; and “the circumstances surrounding the decision to 
withdraw [the decedent’s] life support, including that [the 
decedent’s] daughter was not informed of the progress he had been making since the surgery.”  Id. at 558, 454 P.3d at 499.  
Defense counsel even urged the jury to consider the effect of the intervening acts on the defendant’s culpability in his 
closing argument: 
One more thing.  Remember I asked the doctor, I said what 
if you didn’t pull the tubes out, would he have survived 
another day?  He said yeah.  Would you survive another day?  
Said yeah.  Would you survive another day?  Yeah.  So they don’t really know to this day whether that guy would still 
be alive and what kind of progress he would have been  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
25 
 making over this past year.  They really don’t know, and 
they made a judgment call, and in making that judgment call, 
they want you to hold my client responsible for that, and 
that’s just not right.  That’s just not right. 
 
Id. at 558-59, 454 P.3d at 499-500. 
In light of the evidence, we concluded that a 
causation jury instruction, which “would have enabled the jury 
to consider whether the intervening volitional conduct of the 
family and medical team interrupted the chain of causation 
between [the defendant’s] actions and [decedent’s] death,” was 
warranted.  Id. at 543, 454 P.3d at 484. 
Here, the evidence noted by Angei - that Kanui-Flores 
was alive while at the hospital and that a decision was made to “pull the plug” – does not raise an issue as to causation.  
Unlike in Abella, here, there was no evidence produced at trial 
that Kanui-Flores was making “daily improvements”; nor was there testimony that Kanui-Flores would have recovered while on life 
support.  Id. at 558, 454 P.3d at 499.  Angei has not refuted 
testimony that the stab wound to Kanui-Flores’s head was a “fatal wound” and that the stab wounds to his head and torso 
were the cause of death.  Accordingly, the circuit court did not err by failing to instruct the jury on intervening causation. 
B. There Was No Rational Basis in the Evidence to Support an 
Instruction for the Offense of Reckless Endangering Second  
 
The circuit court instructed the jury on the charged 
offense – Murder in the Second Degree – and the following lesser  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
26 
 included offenses: Manslaughter (Recklessly Causing Death), 
Assault in the First Degree, Assault in the Second Degree 
(Serious Bodily Injury or Substantial Bodily Injury), and 
Assault in the Third Degree.  The jury was also instructed on 
the following defenses: mutual consent as a defense for Assault 
in the Third Degree, and self-defense as a defense for Murder in 
the Second Degree and its lesser included offenses.   
“[J]ury instructions on lesser-included offenses must 
be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and 
convicting the defendant of the included offense.”  Flores, 131 
Hawaiʻi at 51, 314 P.3d at 128 (citation omitted).  Here, Angei 
argues that the circuit court erred in not additionally 
instructing the jury on Reckless Endangering Second.20  We 
disagree; there was no rational basis for the jury to convict Angei of Reckless Endangering Second while acquitting him of 
murder.  Even if there was, the decision not to instruct on 
Reckless Endangering Second was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.   
Murder in the Second Degree occurs when a person 
“intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another person.”  HRS § 707-701.5.  Reckless Manslaughter, the included offense of 
                     
20  The ICA concluded that Reckless Endangering Second is a lesser 
included offense of Murder in the Second Degree.  The State did not seek 
review of that determination.  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
27 
 which Angei was convicted, occurs when a person “recklessly 
causes the death of another person.”  HRS § 707-702(1)(a).  
Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree occurs when a person 
“[e]ngages in conduct that recklessly places another person in 
danger of death or serious bodily injury.”  HRS § 707-714(1)(a) 
(2014).  “A person acts recklessly with respect to a result of 
his conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial and 
unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a result.”  HRS § 702-206(3)(c) (2014).  
State v. Manuel, 148  434, 477 P.3d 874 (2020), 
is instructive here.  In Manuel, which involved a prosecution for Assault in the Second Degree, we held that 
the circuit court
erred in not instructing the jury on the lesser included offense
of Reckless Endangering Second.  Id. at 443, 477 P.3d at 883.  
The complaining witness (CW) testified that he encountered the 
defendant at a pier at night.  Id. at 436, 477 P.3d at 876.  The
defendant appeared to have been drinking and began to argue with
him.  Id. at 436—37, 477 P.3d at 876—77.  According to the CW, 
the defendant hit him on the head, and then stabbed him once in the chest; when the defendant tried to leave, the CW grabbed his
bike and the CW’s arm was sliced during the ensuing struggle.  
Id. at 437, 477 P.3d at 877.  The jury convicted the defendant   
 
 
 Hawai‘i 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
28 
  of Assault in the Second Degree.   Id. at 439, 477 P.3d at 879.21    
On appeal, this court held that the circuit court 
should have sua sponte instructed the jury on Reckless 
Endangering Second.  Id. at 436, 477 P.3d at 876.  We explained 
that the jury could have found that the defendant acted recklessly and that his conduct placed the CW in danger of 
serious bodily injury or death.  Id. at 442-43, 477 P.3d at 882-
83.  Specifically, we noted that there was evidence that both 
the CW and defendant had been drinking, and there were 
inconsistencies in the CW’s statements and testimony: 
Thus, a reasonable juror could have found that [the CW’s] 
testimony was not entirely credible and th at Manue l lacked 
the requisite intent, i.e., intentionally or knowingly, to 
commit second-degree assault.  However, a reasonable juror 
may still have determined that an intoxicated Manuel should 
have understood the potential risk of serious injury arising from opening a knife during an altercation. 
 
Id. at 443, 477 P.3d at 883. 
     Notably, the CW in Manuel was stabbed only once before 
the defendant tried to leave the scene; the second cut occurred  
 
only after the CW chased down the defendant to prevent him from 
leaving.  Id. at 437, 477 P.3d at 877.  
  The circumstances in Manuel, where we held a 
reasonable juror could have concluded that the extent of the 
                     
21  The circuit court also instructed the jury on Assault in the 
Third Degree and Assault in the Third Degree by Mutual Affray.  Id. at 436, 
477 P.3d at 876.     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
29 
 defendant’s culpability was “opening a knife during an 
altercation,” are distinguishable from those present here.  Id. 
at 443, 477 P.3d at 883.  Angei did not just open a knife; he plunged it through Kanui-Flores’s temple and up to an inch and a 
half into his brain.  He also stabbed Kanui-Flores three more 
times, and slashed him another four times.  Thus, the evidence 
here established that Angei intended to stab Kanui-Flores 
(although his purpose in doing so was in dispute), and there was no basis for a reasonable juror to conclude that Angei’s intent 
was limited to creating a “potential risk of serious injury.”  
Id. at 443, 477 P.3d at 883; cf. State v. Moore, 82 Hawai‘ i 202, 
212, 921 P.2d 122, 132 (1996) (holding that jury instructions on 
first and second degree assault were not required where there 
was no basis for a reasonable juror to conclude that the 
defendant, charged with attempted murder, intended to cause or 
was aware he might cause “only serious or substantial bodily 
injury” when he shot the CW at least six times at point blank 
range, causing five gunshot wounds to her upper body).  
Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in declining to instruct the jury on Reckless Endangering Second.  
Moreover, even assuming arguendo that the circuit 
court erred, its failure to instruct the jury on that included 
offense was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In Magbulos, 141 Hawai‘ i at 484-85, 498, 413 P.3d at  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
30 
 388-89, 402, the defendant was charged with and convicted of 
Murder in the Second Degree; the jury had been instructed on the 
lesser included offenses of Reckless Manslaughter and Assault in 
the First Degree.  On appeal, the defendant argued that the 
trial court erred in denying his request to instruct the jury on 
three lesser included offenses: Assault in the Second Degree, 
Assault in the Third Degree, and Assault in the Third Degree by 
Mutual Affray.  Id.  After summarizing prior case law on jury 
instructions on lesser included offenses, the ICA held that “any 
error in failing to instruct on the lower-level assault offenses 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.”  Id. at 499, 413 P.3d 
at 403.  The ICA explained: 
[A]bsent unusual circumstances, the failure to instruct on 
a lesser included offense two levels below the offense for 
which the defendant is found guilty will ordinarily be 
harmless.  In this case, [the defendant] is contending that the failure to instruct on lesser included offenses that 
are at least three levels below the second- degree murder 
for which the jury found him guilty entitles him to a new trial.  It strains credulity to believe that the jury who 
found [the defendant] guilty as charged of second- degree 
murder, despite being instructed on the lesser included 
offenses of manslaughter and first- degree assault, might 
reasonably have found him guilty of the lower- level assault 
offenses if instructed on these offenses.  We therefore 
conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that the Circuit Court’s failure to instruct on the lower- level 
assault offenses affected the outcome of this case.  
 
Id. (alteration in original). 
The ICA’s reasoning in Magbulos is applicable here.  
Similar to Magbulos, the jury at Angei’s trial was instructed on 
four lesser offenses - Reckless Manslaughter, Assault in the 
First Degree, Assault in the Second Degree, and Assault in the  
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***__ 
 
31 
    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna Third Degree – which extended several levels below the charged 
offense of Murder in the Second Degree.  Of the charged and 
instructed offenses, the jury found Angei guilty of Reckless 
Manslaughter rather than the lesser offenses of First-, Second-, 
and Third-Degree Assault.  As in Magbulos, it “strains 
credulity” to believe that, if instructed, the jury would have found Angei guilty of the even lesser offense of Reckless 
Endangering Second.   
Because there was no rational basis in the evidence to 
support acquitting Angei of Murder in the Second Degree and 
convicting him of Reckless Endangering Second, the circuit court 
appropriately declined instructing the jury on this offense.  
Even if in error, the failure to instruct on Reckless 
Endangering Second was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the ICA’s 
October 5, 2020 Judgment on Appeal, which affirmed the circuit 
court’s November 20, 2018 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. 
Dana S. Ishibashi,
for petitioner  
    Chad M. Kumagai,for respondent   
  
     /s/ Fa͑auuga To͑oto͑o 
