 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________  
 
SCWC-13-0000061  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-13-0000061 31-OCT-2016 
08:37 AM 
---oOo--
-
STATE OF HAWAI I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
  
  
vs.
  
 
PATRICK DEGUAIR, JR., Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP
-13-0000061; CR. NO. 08-1-0773)
 
October 31, 2016
  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J.,  NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.
  
I. Introduction 
This case arises out of the 2008 robbery of the Aiea Cue, 
in which three intruders restrained four individuals inside a 
pool hall and stole cash and other valuables. 
Two of the 
intruders, Ju Young Woo (“Woo”) and David Teo (“Teo”), entered     
 
 
  
 
                     
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
into cooperation agreements with the State, and the third 
intruder, Patrick Deguair, Jr. (“Deguair”), continued on to a 
jury trial. Deguair’s defense was that Woo and Teo coerced him 
into participating in the crime.  The jury found Deguair guilty 
on all counts: Count 1 (Robbery in the Second Degree, a class B felony), Count 2 (Kidnapping as a class A felony), and Counts 3, 
4, and 5 (Kidnapping as a class B felony). The jury also 
answered interrogatories finding that  each act of kidnapping was 
committed as a continuing course of conduct, with no separate 
and distinct intent from the robbery. Therefore, pursuant to 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (“ HRS”)  § 701-109(1)(e) (2014), which 
prohibits multiple convictions for offenses committed as a 
continuing course of conduct, the Circuit Court of the First 
1 Circuit  merged Count 1 (the robbery, a lesser grade class B 
felony) into Count 2 (one of the kidnappings, a higher grade 
class A felony).  
On appeal, Deguair argued that the ci
rcuit court erred in 
convicting him of kidnapping as a class A felony on Count 2, as 
he was entitled to the mitigating defense,2 which would have 
reduced the kidnapping to a class B felony. A majority of the 
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
2   The mitigating defense is contained in HRS § 707 -720(3) (2014).  It 
states, as it did at the time of the alleged offense,  “In a prosecution for 
kidnapping, it is a defense which reduces the offense to a class B felony 
that the defendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and not suffering 
from serious or substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior to trial.”  
2
     
 
 
  On certiorari, Deguair argues that all of his convictions 
are now of the same class (class B felonies). He contends that 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e) requires the kidnapping convictions to be 
“merged”  into the robbery conviction. He also asserts that the 
ICA gravely erred in holding that  the circuit court properly 
excluded prior bad act evidence that Woo and Teo were violent, 
worked for O ahu criminal organizations providing protection, and 
needed money. Deguair also contends that the ICA gravely erred 
in holding that the circuit court properly declined to declare a 
mistrial after the prosecutor questioned Deguair about whether 
3  he and Teo had shot guns at the Koko Head shooting range.
                     
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) agreed, v acating the 
circuit court’s Judgment of Conviction and Sentence as to Count 
2 as a class A felony and remanding the case for entry of a 
judgment of conviction on Count 2 as a Class B felony and for 
resentencing solely on Count 2. State v. Deguair , CAAP-13-
0000061 (App. Feb. 27, 2015) (mem.) at 3. 
The ICA rejected 
Deguair’s other points of error and affirmed the circuit court’s 
judgment with respect to the convictions and sentences on Counts 
3, 4, and 5. Deguair, mem. op. at 16.  
Deguair also presents the following questions on certiorari, which we 
do not further address herein, as Deguair’s arguments that the ICA erred are 
unpersuasive: 
2) Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals Gravely Err in 
Ruling That the Circuit Court Did Not Err in Denying the 
Motion to Suppress Evidence?  
(continued . . .) 
3
 3     
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                                  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
We hold that the ICA did not err in concluding that the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in granting the 
State’s motion in limine as to the prior bad acts of Teo and 
Woo. We also hold that the ICA did not err in concluding that 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in declining to 
declare a mistrial. We hold, however, that the ICA erred in 
remanding this case for resentencing solely on the kidnapping 
conviction, foreclosing the possibility that the kidnapping 
convictions could merge into the robbery conviction. We hold 
that, under HRS § 701-109(1)(e), Deguair committed the 
kidnappings as part of a continuous course of conduct in 
committing the robbery; therefore, the kidnapping convictions 
should merge into the robbery conviction. Accordingly, we 
vacate the ICA’s April 21, 2015 Judgment on Appeal, and the 
circuit court’s January 2, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence. On remand, the circuit court is directed to reinstate Deguair’s conviction on Count 1
4, to dismiss the convictions on 
(. . . continued) 
. . . . 
5) Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals Gravely Err in  
Ruling That the Circuit Court Did Not Err in Denying 
Defendant’s Motion for New Trial? 
Prior to entering its judgment of conviction and sentence on the four 
kidnapping offenses (Counts 2 through 5), the 
circuit court had dismissed the 
guilty verdict on the robbery offense (Count 1).  Therefore, in addition to 
vacating the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and sentence, this court 
instructs the circuit court to reinstate the robbery conviction on Count 1.  
See, e.g., State v. Timoteo , 87 Hawai i 108, 109, 119, 952 P.2d 865, 866, 876 
(1997) (instructing the circuit court to reinstate a jury’s guilty verdict 
(continued . . .) 
4
 4     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
                                                                  
  
 
    
       
      
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5, and to resentence Deguair on Count 1 
only, pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e), as the kidnapping 
convictions merged into the robbery conviction. 
II. Background 
A. Indictment 
On May 21, 2008, the State filed an Indictment against 
Deguair, Woo, and Teo alleging that they committed Robbery in 
the First Degree (Count 1), in violation of HRS § 708 -
840(1)(b)(ii) (2014).5 The Indictment also alleged that they 
kidnapped Paul Beltran (Count 2), Ruth Lemons (Count 3), John 
Llacuna (Count 4), and Talagu Moliga (Count 5), all in violation 
of HRS § 707-720(1)(e) (2014).6 Before trial, both Woo and Teo 
entered into plea agreements and agreed to testify for the 
State, and Deguair proceeded to trial on his own. 
(. . . continued)
  
against the defendant for simple trespass and remanding the case to the 
circuit court for resentencing).
 
5   That statute provides, in relevant part, as it did at the time of the 
alleged offense:
 
Robbery in the first degree. (1) A person commits the 
offense of robbery in the first degree if, in the course of 
committing theft . . . (b) The person is armed with a 
dangerous instrument . . . and: . . . (ii) The person 
threatens the imminent use of force against the person of anyone present with intent to compel acquiescence to the 
taking of or escaping with the property. . . . 
6    That statute provides, as it did at the time of the alleged offenses, 
“(1)  A person commits the offense of kidnapping if the person intentionally 
or knowingly restrains another person with intent to: . . .  (e)  Terrorize 
that person or a third person. . . .”  
5
     
 
 
  
 On August 29, 2012, the State filed   a Motion in Limine No. 
1 requesting an order from the circuit court compelling Deguair 
to disclose “any and all evidence the defense  intends  to use”  to 
7 8 support the anticipated duress   and choice of evils  defenses.   
                     
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. The State’s Motion in Limine No. 2 
7 HRS § 702- 231 (2014) codifies the duress defense. It states, in 
relevant part, as it did at the time of the alleged offenses, the following: 
(1) It is a defense to a penal charge that the defendant engaged in the conduct or caused the result alleged because 
he was coerced to do so by the use of, or a threat to use, 
unlawful force against his person or the person of another, 
which a person of reasonable firmness in his situation 
would have been unable to resist. (2) The defense provided by this section is unavailable if 
the defendant recklessly placed himself in a situation in 
which it was probable that he would be subjected to duress. 
The defense is also unavailable if he was negligent in 
placing himself in such a situation, whenever negligence suffices to establish the requisite state of mind for the 
offense charged. . . . 
(5) In prosecutions for any offense described in this Code, 
the defense asserted under this section shall constitute an 
affirmative defense. The defendant shall have the burden of going forward with the evidence to prove the facts 
constituting such defense, unless such facts are supplied 
by the testimony of the prosecuting witness or circumstance 
in such testimony, and of proving such facts by a 
preponderance of the evidence pursuant to section 701 -115. 
8 HRS § 703- 302 (2014) codifies the choices of evils defense.  It states, 
in relevant part, as it did at the time of the alleged offenses, the 
following: 
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another 
is justifiable provided that: 
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such conduct 
is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law 
defining the offense charged; 
(b) Neither the Code nor other law defining the offense 
provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the specific 
situation involved; and 
(c) A legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed does not otherwise plainly appear. . . . 
6
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. David Teo told Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr. that he 
(David Teo) had just gotten out of jail and “needed this 
take.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The State objected to the timing of the  disclosure of this HRE 
Rule 404(b) evidence, as the trial had been pending for four 
years, and Deguair provided notice to the State of these bad 
acts with only two weeks before the start of trial.     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
That same day, Deguair’s counsel sent the State two letters 
setting forth prior bad act evidence concerning Teo and Woo that 
Deguair intended to proffer.  Two days later, on August 31, 
2012, the State filed a Motion in Limine No. 2 seeking to 
preclude reference to the following allegations: 
1. David Teo is/was known as a strong arm and debt 
collector for Oahu crime organizations. 
2. David Teo participated in the “taxing” of legal and 
illegal gambling businesses for protection of their 
businesses. 
3. In [sic] or about March 2008, David Teo smashed a man’s 
face into the windshield of a car while attempting to 
collect money from the man, in the parking lot of Tony 
Roma’s restaurant in Pearl City.  
5. David Teo said to Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr., 
“Remember what happened to the guy in the parking lot.” 
6. Ju Young Woo protected criminal organizations operating 
in the Pearl Ci
ty and Aiea Communities. 
7. Ju Young Woo received and sold stolen motor vehicle 
parts. 
8. Ju Young Woo collected money for drug dealers. 
9. Ju Young Woo beat several people with a metal pipe on 
the bike path near the ABC Used Auto Parts. 10. Aiea Cu e was not paying its “tax” for protection to 
“the Samoans.” 11. Ju Young Woo needed money to pay a lawyer for 
representation concerning an arrest for stealing a tractor. 
7

     
 
 
  At a hearing on the motion, Deguair’s counsel argued that 
the bad act evidence was relevant to his duress and choice of 
evils defenses. Specifically, he argued that the jury needed to 
know what Deguair knew of Teo and Woo in order to judge whether 
a person of reasonable firmness would have been able to resist 
these men. The State counter-argued that the probative value of 
the evidence was “so attenuated” that it was “outweighed by 403 
concerns. . . .”   
  
  
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The circuit court ruled as follows: 
I am going to  . . . specifically make that 403 
determination that any probative value this might have 
along the lines that [Deguair’s counsel] has brought up as 
to that element of the duress defense . . . would be I 
think substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice and confusion of the issues, et cetera.  . . . I’m 
going to grant the State’s motion t o preclude all of these 
except . . .  three and five.  Because . . . that is a 
threat, certainly an implied threat, the use of force that 
would go directly to the Defense’s duress defense which I’m 
strongly inclined  to include in this case when it goes to 
the jury.    
 
C. Trial 
1. Undisputed Facts 
The facts about the robbery elicited at trial are not 
disputed. 
Deguair did not deny his participation (with Teo and 
Woo) in robbing the Aiea Cue and kidnapping four individuals who 
were there. Instead, Deguair’s primary defense was duress. He 
claimed he took part in Woo’s plan because he was scared of Teo. 
The facts elicited at trial regarding the events of April 
3, 2008 were as follows. At closing time at the Aiea Cue, four 
8
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
friends remained on the premises:  John Llacuna (the cashier), 
Ruth Lemons (Llacuna’s girlfriend), Paul Beltran (who helped 
with cleaning and odd jobs), and Tony Moliga (security and 
parking lot attendant). Beltran was at the back door trying to 
lock it, when he heard knocking. Llacuna went to the door, when 
it suddenly burst open, and Teo, Deguair, and Woo entered.  
Beltran ran toward the front door, and Teo pursued him, 
tackled him to the ground, handcuffed him behind his back, and left him face-down on the ground.  Llacuna, 
Lemons, and Moliga 
were herded to the rear of the Aiea Cue and ordered to lie face down and to relinquish their cell phones. Teo later carried 
Beltran over to them. 
It appeared that the three intruders were working together. 
Deguair used a crowbar to strike and redirect the videocameras.  
Woo used a torch to cut open the ATM and coin machine. The cash 
register was also opened with a nearby key. Teo, Deguair, and 
Woo exited the Aiea Cue after taking money and other property. 
2. Testimony of Woo 
The State called Woo who testified that he met Deguair 
shortly before the Aiea Cue robbery. Woo explained that Deguair 
was the mastermind behind the robbery and assigned Woo the job 
of cutting open the ATM and change machine, assigned Teo the job 
of getting people on the ground, and gave himself the job of 
redirecting the videocameras. Woo testified that he did not 
9
     
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
force Deguair to participate in the robbery, and that Deguair 
participated willingly. At the close of Woo’s testimony, the 
State rested.   
3.  Testimony of David Teo 
The defense called Teo, an acquaintance of Deguair’s. He 
testified that the robbery was Deguair’s plan, that he did not 
force Deguair to make a plan, and that Deguair participated 
willingly in the robbery. 
4.  Testimony of Patrick Deguair, Jr. 
Outside the jury’s hearing, before Deguair took the stand, 
Deguair’s counsel asked the circuit court if he could elicit 
testimony that Deguair was afraid of Woo because he saw Woo kill 
a man in March 2008. The circuit court decided to allow the 
testimony to come in. 
Deguair then took the stand. He testified that he 
witnessed Teo “walk[] up behind [a] guy and smash[] his head 
into” a car windshield, bloodying the man’s face, and causing the man to pass out on the ground. He testified that Teo told 
him to buy an acetylene torch and fill it with gas a week before 
the Aiea Cue robbery. 
Deguair also testified that he contacted Woo for motorcycle 
mirrors, and Woo asked Deguair to meet him at Aiea Cue and, 
later, the junkyard. Woo gave Deguair the mirrors at the 
junkyard. When Deguair asked how much he owed, Woo told him not 
10
     
 
to worry about it and that Deguair could help him later. Woo 
then started telling Deguair about his plan to rob the Aiea Cue. 
Woo said people inside the Aiea Cue would let him in.  He 
intended to take $50,000 that he said was in a safe at the 
bottom of the change machine. Woo asked Deguair to go with him 
to turn the videocameras up. Deguair told him he could not be 
involved in the robbery because he had a good federal job.  Just 
then, an SUV pulled up and Teo exited and approached them. 
While Deguair continued to turn Woo down, Teo “surprise[d]” 
Deguair, “got [him] from the side and . . . pin[ned Deguair’s] 
head against . . . the SUV.” Teo banged Deguair’s  head on the 
side of the SUV and squeezed Deguair’s neck. Teo told Deguair, “Punk, I need this take. . . Remember what happened in the 
parking lot? You like that happen to you?” Deguair believed 
Teo was referring to the incident in the parking lot when Teo 
smashed a man’s face into a car windshield. At that point, Woo 
came closer to Deguair and said, “Come on, you gotta do this. . . . Brah, I give you free parts. . . . What? You too good for 
us? You cannot do this kind stuff when we need your help?”   
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Deguair testified that he got into the SUV because he was 
afraid of Teo. He testified that Woo produced the crowbar. 
When the group arrived at Aiea Cue, Deguair paused and did not 
get out of the SUV, so Teo said, “Punk, no make me come in there 
and get you.” Deguair testified that he did not go voluntarily 
11

     
 
 
  At the end of Deguair’s direct examination, the State asked 
the defense to make “an affirmative declaration on the record  
that it has abandoned the duress defense as to Woo concerning an 
alleged March 2008 murder at the ABC junkyard.” The court 
declined to order the defense to do so, stating that the murder 
simply had not come up in Deguair’s testimony.  
 Also on cross-examination, the following exchange took  
 
place between the State and Deguair:  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
through the Aiea Cue door and he did not feel free to leave. 
Deguair admitted that he turned the videocameras towards the 
ceiling. Woo then told him to look for a “turbo box” by the 
cash register area, and Deguair complied. He went to the cash 
register area, but there was no box there, so Woo told Deguair 
to tell Teo that, and Teo started ransacking the cashier’s area. 
Meanwhile, Woo started cutting the change machine open. Woo 
then called Deguair over and used his pry bar to pry open the 
machine. Woo ordered Deguair to get the kidnappees’ cell 
phones, and Deguair complied.  
Q [by the State]: Now, you had met David Teo before this 
April 3, 2008 robbery; right? 
A: A few times, yes. 
Q:
 And you told us that when you were living at the Royal 
Gardens in Waikiki, he came over; right? 
A: That’s one of the time s he came over, yeah. 
Q: And isn’t it true that before the April 3, 2008 
robbery, you took David Teo to the Koko Head range to shoot guns?  
[Deguair’s counsel]: 
Objection. 
[The State]: 
702-231(2).
 
The Court: Sustained.
 
[Deguair’s counsel]: 
 
That’s fine. 
12
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 The circuit court considered  the question to be “an ambush” 
and stated that it was “shocked” when the State asked the 
question, as it seemed to have come “out of left field.” It 
also considered the evidence to be “completely irrelevant” as 
well as “prejudicial.” The circuit court d ecided not to declare 
a mistrial, as that would be “way too drastic a remedy to 
correct this.” While the circuit court believed he had stricken 
the answer from the record, defense counsel pointed out that 
there was no answer because the circuit court had sustained the 
defense’s objection. The circuit court then stated that the 
question was “no harm, no foul.” The circuit court proposed 
striking the question and telling the jury to disregard it, but 
defense counsel did not ask the circuit court to do that.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
When court adjourned for the day, Deguair’s counsel made an 
oral motion for mistrial due to the Koko Head shooting range 
question. He argued he had no notice of that bad act evidence, 
and the parties had agreed to approach the bench and give the 
court an opportunity to rule on whether such evidence could be 
elicited. The State counter-argued that the jury should hear 
the evidence to determine if Deguair had “recklessly place[d] 
himself in a situation whereby this alleged coercion can be 
exerted upon him,” which renders the duress defense unavailable. 
The State also argued that it had been trying to establish a 
relationship between Teo and Deguair before the robbery. 
13
     
 
 
  Relevant to this exchange, the circuit court had instructed 
the jury at the start of trial as follows:  
 Deguair’s redirect testimony commenced the following day. 
Deguair again testified that he participated in  the Aiea Cue 
robbery because he was afraid of Teo. He believed Teo could 
have killed him if Teo smashed his head into a windshield. The 
defense then rested.  
  
 The State put on rebuttal evidence by Teo and Woo that 
Deguair was not coerced into participating in the crime. Teo denied ever smashing a man’s face into a car windshield. He also denied slamming Deguair against the side of the SUV and 
squeezing his neck. He denied reminding Deguair of how he 
smashed a man’s fa ce into a windshield, denied saying that he 
“needed this take,” denied forcing Deguair into the SUV, denied 
asking Deguair to buy a torch kit and gas, and denied forcing 
Deguair out of the SUV at the Aiea Cue and telling him, “[P]unk, 
no make me get out and get you.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
If I sustain an objection to a question, for example, a 
witness is testifying, one of the attorneys is examining 
that witness and the attorney asks 
a question, the other 
attorney jumps up and objects, if I sustain the objection, 
it means I’m not going to allow the witness to answer the 
question. If something like that happens, don’t speculate 
what the answer might have been. Don’t speculate about the 
question. Don’t speculate about my ruling. An unanswered 
question is just that. It’s an unanswered question. It’s 
not evidence of any kind.  
 
5. The State’s Rebuttal Evidence 
14

     
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On rebuttal, Woo testified that when Deguair visited the 
junkyard ostensibly to discuss motorcycle mirrors, it was 
Deguair who said, “I’m not here about the mirrors.” Woo denied 
asking Deguair to redirect the Aiea Cue videocameras, denied 
telling Deguair, “Come on, you got to do this for us,” and 
denied that Deguair stated that he did not want to participate in the robbery. He also testified that he did not see Teo slam 
Deguair against the side of the SUV or choke him. Woo testified 
that Teo did not force or threaten Deguair to go into or out of 
the SUV. After rebuttal, the State rested. 
6. Merger Sidebar 
The jury was given a set of interrogatories asking whether 
the robbery and each of the kidnappings were committed through a 
continuous course of conduct and with no separate and distinct 
intent, mirroring the language of HRS § 701-109(1)(e), the 
statute at issue in this case.  While the jury was deliberating, 
the circuit court asked for counsels’ thoughts on what the circuit court should do in the event that the jury answered 
interrogatories in a manner that would result in the merger of 
the robbery and kidnapping convictions. The circuit court 
stated its inclination to merge the offenses by dismissing 
whichever conviction was a lesser grade felony. In the event 
all of the felony convictions were of the same grade, however, 
the circuit court stated it would invite counsels’ input. The 
15
     
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
State also agreed that that situation would require some thought 
and possible briefing. The circuit court then indicated that if 
all the convictions were of the same grade, it would dismiss the 
kidnapping convictions and find Deguair guilty of robbery only. 
The circuit court then stated that further briefing was not 
necessary at that time. 
7. Verdict and Merger 
The jury found Deguair guilty of robbery in Count 1 as a 
class B felony,9 kidnapping in Count 2 as a class A felony, and 
kidnapping in Counts 3, 4, and 5 as class B felonies. The jury 
also found that Counts 1 and 2, Counts 1 and 3, Counts 1 and 4, 
and Counts 1 and 5 were “part of a continuing and uninterrupted 
course of conduct” and were committed “with one intention, one 
general impulse, and one plan encompassing both offenses, ” for 
purposes of the merger subsection of HRS § 701-109, subsection 
(1)(e). As a result, the circuit court dismissed Count 1 
(robbery), consistent with its earlier decision that a class B robbery conviction had to merge into a higher class A kidnapping 
conviction. 
The jury found Deguair guilty of robbery in the second (not first) 
degree. HRS § 708- 841 (2014) states, as it did at the time of the alleged 
offense, “A person commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in 
the course of committing theft . . . [t]he person threatens the imminent use 
of force against the person or anyone who is present with intent to compel 
acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the property[.]” 
16
 9     
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
8. Sentence 
The circuit court sentenced Deg uair to 20 years’ 
incarceration on Count 2 (class A kidnapping), and 10 years’ 
incarceration each on Counts 3, 4, and 5 (class B kidnappings), 
with credit for time served, and with the sentences to run 
concurrently. Deguair timely appealed. 
D.  ICA Appeal 
On appeal, Deguair argued that the circuit court erred in 
convicting him of kidnapping as a class A felony on Count 2, as 
he was entitled to the mitigating defense (that he voluntarily 
released the victim, alive and not suffering from serious or 
substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior to trial), 
which would have reduced the kidnapping to a class B felony. A 
majority of the ICA agreed. Deguair, mem. op. at 3.  The ICA 
therefore vacated Deguair’s conviction and sentence on Count 2 
and “rema
nd[ed] the case for entry of a judgment of conviction 
on Count 2 as a class B felony and for resentencing on Count 2.” 
Id.  
The ICA, however, rejected Deguair’s argument that the 
kidnapping convictions should have merged into the robbery 
conviction. 
It held, “Where the jury returns a verdict of 
guilty on two counts that merge, the State is given the option 
to decide which of counts subject to merger should be 
dismissed.” Id. at 10. The ICA cited State v. Padilla, 114 
17

     
 
 
  
   
 
 
 Lastly, the ICA rejected Deguair’s argument that the 
circuit court erred in failing to declare a mistrial following *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawaii 507, 517, 164 P.3d 765, 775 (App. 2007), for this 
proposition. The ICA stated that the “State did not oppose the 
Circuit Court’s decision to merge the robbery count into the separate kidnapping counts,” and that, on appeal, “ [t]he State 
does not argue that it would have objected to the Circuit Court’s merger decision if the mitigating defense had been 
applied to Count 2.” 
Deguair, mem. op. at 10 & 10 n.4. 
Further, the ICA rejected Deguair’s argument that all of the kidnapping convictions should have merged together, stating that  
he provided no authority for that proposition, and that each kidnapping count in Deguair’s case “required proof of a separate 
and distinct intent with respect to each victim that were not subject to merger,” citing State v. Correa, 5 Haw. App. 644, 706  
P.2d 1321 (1985)).   Deguair, mem. op. at 10.   
The ICA also rejected Deguair’s argument that the circuit 
court erred in excluding prior bad act evidence concerning Woo and Teo for three reasons. 
Id. at 14. First, defense counsel’s 
notice was untimely; second, the admission of the bad act evidence would have created a danger of unfair prejudice and confusion of the issues and prolonged the trial; and third, the 
circuit court allowed Deguair to present other evidence that 
supported his duress and choice of evils defenses. Id.  
18

     
 
 
  
 
 “Prior bad act  ”  evidence  under Hawai i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 404(b) (1993)  is admissible when “it is 1) relevant 
and 2) more probative than prejudicial.”  State v. Maelega ,  80 
Hawaii 172, 183, 907 P.2d 758, 769 (1995)  (citations omitted).  
A trial court’s determination that evidence is “relevant” within 
the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the  
right/wrong standard  of review .   State v. Pulse ,  83 Hawai i 229, 
247, 925 P.2d 797, 815 (1996).  However, a trial court's 
balancing of the probative value of prior bad act evidence     
against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE Rule *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the State’s question about shooting guns at the Koko Head range.  
The ICA stated that it “need not resolve whether the State’s 
question was improper,” as the circuit court sustained defense 
counsel’s objection to the question before Deguair gave an 
answer, defense counsel declined to have the circuit court 
strike the question, and the circuit court instructed the jury 
that an unanswered question was not evidence. Id. at 15.  The  
ICA also considered the question to be “brief and isolated.” 
Id.  Finding no other errors by the circuit court, the ICA 
affirmed the circuit cou rt’s  judgment of conviction and sentence 
as to Counts 3, 4, and 5.  
III. Standards of Review 
A. Motion in Limine: Prior Bad Act Evidence 
19

     
 
 
   
 The denial of a motion for mistrial    is within the sound 
discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a 
clear abuse of discretion. See State v. Loa ,  83 Hawai i 335, 
349, 926 P.2d 1258, 1272  (1996) (citations omitted) .  The trial 
court abuses its discretion when it clearly  exceeds the bounds 
of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice 
to the substantial  detriment of a party litigant.   State v. 
Ganal,  81 Hawai i 358, 373, 917 P.2d 370, 385 (1996)  (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted)).  
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
403 (1993) is reviewed for abuse of discretion.   See id .   An 
abuse of discretion occurs when the court “clearly exceeds the 
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.”  
State v. Furutani,  76 Hawai i 172, 179, 873 P.2d 51, 58 (1994)  
(citations omitted).  
B.  Motion for Mistrial 
C.  
Interpretation of HRS § 701-109(1)(e) 
“[T]he interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.” State v. Tauilili , 96 Hawai i 195, 197, 29 
P.3d 914, 916 (2001) (citations omitted). 
20
     
 
 
  
 
 We first address whether the ICA erred in concluding that 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in excluding  
prior bad act evidence concerning Woo and Teo. On certiorari, 
Deguair argues that (1) two-week  notice of the defense’s 
intention to use Woo’s and Teo’s prior bad acts was sufficient 
time for the State to investigate and discuss the allegations 
with Woo and Teo; and (2) the full range of prior bad acts was 
necessary to show that the single incident allowed by the trial 
court (Teo’s smashing a man’s head into a windshield) was not an 
isolated incident and explained why Deguair took Teo seriously 
when he said, “Punk, I need this take.”  
   We need not decide whether the defense provided reasonable 
notice to the State of the prior bad acts. The circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in excluding the evidence. HRE 
Rule 404(b) provides that  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. Discussion 
A. Motion in Limine: Prior Bad Act Evidence 
[e]vidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not 
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be 
admissible where such evidence is probative of another fact 
that is of consequence to the determination of the action, 
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, 
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of 
mistake or accident. In criminal cases, the proponent of 
evidence to be offered under this subsection shall provide 
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if 
the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of 
the date, location, and general nature of any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial. 
21
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“The list of permissible purposes in Rule 404(b) is not intended 
to be exhaustive ‘for the range of relevancy outside the ban is 
almost infinite.’”  State v. Clark ,  83 Hawai i 289, 300, 926 P.2d 
194, 205 (1996) (citation omitted). HRE Rule 403 provides, 
however, “[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice, confusion of  the issues, or misleading the 
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.”  
 
In this case, the circuit court did not allow Deguair to 
present the following evidence: 
1. David Teo is/was known as a strong arm and debt 
collector for Oahu crime organizations. 
2. David Teo participated in the “taxing” of legal and 
illegal gambling businesses for protection of their 
businesses.  
. . . . 
4. David Teo told Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr. that he 
(David Teo) had just gotten out of jail and “needed this 
take.”  
. . . . 
6. Ju Young Woo protected criminal organizations operating 
in the Pearl City and Aiea Communities. 7.
 Ju Young Woo received and sold stolen motor vehicle 
parts. 
8. Ju Young Woo collected money for drug dealers. 
9. Ju Young Woo beat several people with a metal pipe on 
the bike path near the ABC Used Auto Parts. 
10. Aiea Cue was not paying its “tax” for protection to 
“the Samoans.” 
22
     
 
 
  
 
In this case, Deguair’s argument for admitting this evidence was 
that it was relevant to his duress and choice of evils defenses. 
At trial, Deguair’s defense was that Teo in p articular (not Woo) 
coerced him into participating in the Aiea Cue robbery. Therefore, items 6, 7, 8, 9,  and 11 of the State’s Motion in 
Limine No. 2, which all concern Woo, were not relevant to 
Deguair’s defense and were, therefore, properly excluded. I t 
should be noted that the circuit court did allow Deguair to 
present evidence that he saw Woo murder a man, but Deguair chose 
not to present that evidence. Deguair’s abandonment of that 
evidence further reinforces his focus on Teo, not Woo.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
11. Ju Young Woo needed money to pay a lawyer for 
representation concerning an arrest for stealing a tractor. 
The remaini
ng items related to Teo in the State’s Motion in 
Limine No. 2 are items 1, 2, 4, and 10. (Item 10 stated that Aiea Cue had not been paying its protection money to the 
Samoans; it can be inferred that Teo, not Woo, would be the one 
concerned with collecting protection money, per item 2).  
Despite the preclusion of item 4, Deguair did manage to testify 
at trial that Teo told him, “Punk, I need this take,” although 
he did not testify that Teo had just gotten out of jail. In 
short, the remaining precluded evidence at issue on certiorari 
was that Teo was a strong-arm debt collector for crime 
organizations, that he collected protection money from legal and illegal businesses, that Aiea Cue was not paying its protection 
23
     
 
 
  
 We next address whether the ICA erred in concluding that 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in declining to 
declare a mistrial, after the prosecutor asked Deguair about 
shooting guns at Koko Head range. When prosecutorial  misconduct  
is the basis for a motion for mistrial , a new trial is warranted 
only where “the actions of the prosecutor have ca used prejudice 
to the defendant’s right to a fair trial.” State v. Kupihea ,  80 
Hawaii 307, 316, 909 P.2d 1122, 1131 (1996)   (citation omitted). 
“In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial 
misconduct reached the level of reversible error, [the reviewing 
court] consider[s] the nature of the alleged misconduct, the 
promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
money, and that Teo had just gotten out of jail.  Although each 
of these items could be probative of why Teo might have 
participated in robbing Aiea Cue, it is less probative of why 
Teo would force Deguair to participate. This evidence was too 
attenuated from the duress issue, unlike the evidence that Teo 
smashed a man’s face into a windshield, then reminded Deguair of 
that incident in order to secure Deguair’s participation in the 
robbery --  evidence that the circuit court allowed.  In short, 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in precluding the 
evidence after weighing its probative value versus the danger of 
confusing the issues and misleading the jury.   
B. Motion for Mistrial 
24

 ***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   *** 
 
25 
 or weakness of the evidence against [the] defendant.”   Id. 
(citations omitted). 
 Deguair argues that the nature of the alleged misconduct 
was “egregious”:  
None of the witnesses testified that they saw any firearms 
or that anyone threatened to use a firearm. The mere 
mention of it by the prosecutor would serve no other 
purpose but to inflame the jury and prejudice them into 
believing that Deguair was a hard -core criminal ready and 
willing to use a gun.  
 
With regard to the strength or weakness of the evidence, Deguair 
argues that the evidence against him was not strong because Woo 
and Teo were really the masterminds behind the robbery.  As to 
the “promptness or lack of a curative instruction,” Deguair 
acknowledges that the circuit court sustained the objection, and 
that defense counsel did not take the circuit court up on its 
offer to strike the question, but argues that the two other 
factors “should weigh in favor of a new trial.”   
 With respect to the first factor, we disagree with Deguair 
that the prosecutor’s question was egregiously improper.  There 
is merit to the State’s argument that it was trying to establish 
that a relationship existed between Teo and Deguair before the 
robbery that would have tended to negate the defense of duress.   
We agree with defense counsel and the circuit court, however, 
that the intention to offer this evidence should have been 
previously disclosed.  We also agree with the circuit court that     
 
 
  
 With respect to the second factor, the circuit court 
sustained defense counsel’s objection to the question about 
shooting guns at Koko Head range prior to a response being 
given, had offered to strike the question (and defense counsel 
did not take the circuit court up on its offer),  and had already 
previously instructed the jury as follows  
 
The jury is presumed to have followed the court’s instructions. 
See State v. Knight , 80 Hawai i 318, 327, 909 P.2d 1133, 1142 
(1996) (“[A]s a rule, juries are presumed to . . . follow all of 
the trial court’s instructions.”) (citation omitted).   
 Finally, Deguair  argues that the evidence against him was  
not strong. The undisputed testimony showed that Deguair participated in the robbery and kidnappings, and that the three 
intruders were working together.   There  was contradictory  
testimony regarding Deguair’s  defenses of duress and choice of 
evils from his accomplices . Deguair’s former co-defendants Woo 
and Teo testified that Deguair masterminded the Aiea Cue *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
declaring a mistrial in these circums tances would have been “way 
too drastic a remedy.” 
If I sustain an objection to a question, for example, a 
witness is testifying, one of the attorneys is examining that witness and the attorney asks a question, the othe r 
attorney jumps up and objects, if I sustain the objection, it means I’m not going to allow the witness to answer the 
question. If something like that happens, don’t speculate 
what the answer might have been. Don’t speculate about the 
question. Don’t speculate about my ruling. An unanswered 
question is just that. It’s an unanswered question. It’s 
not evidence of any kind.  
26

     
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
robbery, whereas Deguair testified that he was forced to 
participate. Although “a case of guilt is never ‘strong’ if 
evidence essential to conviction is the testimony of an alleged 
accomplice whose credibility the defendant subjects to severe 
attack,” State v. Pokini , 55 Haw. 640, 645, 526 P.2d 94, 102 
(1974), the undisputed testimony contradicted Deguair’s duress and choice of evils defenses. 
Under these circumstances, we believe that the prosecutor’s 
question did not cause prejudice to Deguair’s right to a fair trial. 
Therefore, we agree with the ICA that the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in declining to declare a mistrial. 
A. Merger 
Lastly, we address whether the ICA erred in remanding this 
case to the circuit court solely for resentencing on Count 2 
(kidnapping) as a class B felony. Before this court, Deguair 
argues that the kidnapping convictions should merge into the 
robbery conviction. HRS § 701-109(1)(e) provides the following: 
(1) When the same conduct of a defendant may establish an 
element of more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for each offense of which such conduct is an 
element. The defendant may not, however, be convicted of 
more than one offense if: . . . 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course of 
conduct and the defendant’ s course of conduct was 
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific 
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses. 
HRS § 701-109  “interposes a constraint on multiple convictions 
arising from the same  criminal conduct .” State v. Matias, 102 
Hawaii 300, 305, 75 P.3d 1191, 1196 (2003). The commentary to 
27

     
 
 
  
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 701-109 states that the statute  “reflects a policy to 
limit the possibility of multiple convictions and extended 
sentences when the defendant has basically engaged in only one 
course of criminal conduct directed at one criminal goal, or 
when it would otherwise be unjust to convict the defendant for 
more than one offense.” The “one course of criminal conduct 
directed at one criminal goal” in this case was the robbery of 
the Aiea Cue. The jury found that each kidnapping was committed 
as a continuing course of conduct, with no separate and distinct 
intent from the robbery.   The kidnappings of Beltran, Llacuna, 
Lemons, and Moliga were committed solely in furtherance of the robbery. Therefore, we agree with Deguair that the kidnapping 
convictions should merge into the robbery conviction.  
The State maintains that under Padilla
, it is the State’s 
prerogative to elect whether the kidnapping convictions should 
merge into the robbery conviction or vice versa. The State 
therefore endorses the ICA’s conclusion in its memorandum 
opinion in this case that Padilla, 114 Hawai i 507, 164 P.3d 765, 
allows the prosecution to determine how criminal convictions 
should merge. Deguair, mem. op. at 10. Padilla is 
distinguishable. 
In Padilla, the circuit court plainly erred by 
failing to give a merger instruction in the first place. 
Padilla
, 114 Hawai i at 517, 164 P.3d at 775. The usual remedy 
in that instance is a retrial. Id. On appeal, however, the 
28

     
 
 
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prosecution suggested dismissing one of the defendant’s 
convictions to remedy the defect, rather than face wholesale 
retrial. Id.   The ICA in Padilla   agreed with the prosecution’s 
suggested remedy. Id.   Padilla, therefore, does not stand for 
the blanket proposition that the prosecution determines how 
multiple convictions of the same class merge.  
We further note that the ICA observed that “
[t]he State 
does not argue on appeal that it would have objected to the Circuit Court’s merger decision [i.e., the merger of the robbery 
conviction into the kidnapping convictions] if the mitigating 
defense had been applied to Count 2.” Deguair, mem. op. at 10 
n.4. Actually, the State made no election on appeal in this 
case. Further, at trial, the State expressed its desire to 
brief the merger issue in the event all of the convictions were 
of the same class. While the jury was deliberating, the circuit 
court asked for counsels’ thoughts on what the circuit court 
should do in the event that the robbery and kidnapping convictions merged and all were of the same class. The circuit 
court stated its inclination to convict Deguair of robbery and 
dismiss all of the kidnapping convictions, if all the 
convictions were class B felonies. The State asked for an 
opportunity to brief how merger would operate under those 
circumstances, and the defense stated it had no objection to 
further briefing. The circuit court also decided that if one of 
29
     
 
 
  
  
 
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the kidnapping convictions came back as a class A felony, and 
the rest of the convictions came back as class B felonies, the 
circuit court was required to merge the robbery conviction into 
the kidnapping convictions. The jury returned precisely that 
combination of convictions, so there was no further opportunity 
to discuss how merger would operate where all of the convictions 
were of the same class. 
The ICA also held that each kidnapping conviction must 
stand because “the kidnappin g counts charged in this case 
required proof of a separate and distinct intent with respect to 
each victim and were not subject to merger.” Deguair, mem. op. 
at 10. For this proposition, the ICA cited to Correa, 5 Haw. 
App. 644, 706 P.2d 1321. Correa, however, does not apply.  At 
issue in Correa was whether kidnapping was a lesser included offense of robbery under HRS § 701-109(1)(a), not whether 
kidnapping and robbery should merge as part of a continuing 
course of conduct under HRS § 701-109(1)(e).  Further, in this case, the question is not whether each kidnapping merged with 
the other kidnappings, but whether each kidnapping merged into 
the single robbery offense. Therefore, Correa does not, as a 
matter of law, foreclose the possibility that the kidnapping convictions could be dismissed upon merger into the robbery 
conviction. Indeed, the jury’s answers to interrogatories 
indicated that the jury found that each kidnapping was part of a 
30
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 The ICA did not err in concluding that the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in excluding  the prior bad act 
evidence concerning Teo and Woo. The ICA also did not err in 
concluding that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion  
in declining to declare a mistrial. The ICA did err, however, in remanding this case for resentencing solely on the Count 2 kidnapping conviction, as the kidnapping convictions merged into 
the robbery conviction. Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s April 
21, 2015 Judgment on Appeal, and the circuit court’s January 2, 
2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. We remand this case 
to the circuit court and direct it to reinstate Deguair’s 
conviction on Count 1, to dismiss the convictions on Counts 2,  
3, 4, and 5, and to  resentence Deguair on Count 1 only, pursuant *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
continuous course of conduct, and committed with no separate and 
distinct intent from the single robbery. 
Therefore, the ICA erred in remanding this case to the 
circuit court solely for resentencing on Count 2 (kidnapping as 
a class B felony), foreclosing the possibility that the 
kidnapping convictions could merge into the robbery conviction. 
We hold that, under HRS § 701-109(1)(e), Deguair committed the 
kidnappings as part of a continuous course of conduct in 
committing the robbery; therefore, the kidnapping convictions 
merge into the robbery conviction. 
V. Conclusion 
31
     
 
 
    
 
    
James M. Anderson 
for respondent     
  
   
     
        
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to HRS § 701-109(1)(e), based on the merger of Counts 2 through 
5 into Count 1. 
Dwight C.H. Lum 
for petitioner /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
32
 