      ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed
Supreme Court SCWC-30573 27-JAN-2014 09:43 AM  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
----o0o— 
CAREN DIAMOND and BEAU BLAIR, Petitioners/Plaintiffs­
Appellants/Appellees-Cross-Appellees,
 
vs.
 
CRAIG DOBBIN and WAGNER ENGINEERING SERVICES, INC.,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees/Appellants-Cross-Appellees,
 
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee/Appellee-Cross-Appellant.
 
SCWC-30573 and SCWC-11-0000345
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 30573, CAAP-11-0000345; CIV. NOS. 09-1-0197, 10-1-0116)
 
January 27, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold that in making a shoreline determination
 
1
pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statues (HRS) § 205A-42 (1993) ,
1
 HRS § 205A-42 states in its entirety:
 
(continued...)
         
          
        
      
      
         
         
        
       
       
    
          
 
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee/Appellee-Cross-Appellant State of 
Hawai'i, Board of Land and Natural Resources (the BLNR), must 
consider the historical evidence of the upper reaches of the wash of the waves. The BLNR’s May 21, 2010 “Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order” (Amended Decision), establishing a certified shoreline for the property owned by Respondent/Defendant-Appellees/Appellants-Cross-Appellee Craig Dobbin (Dobbin) and surveyed by Respondent/Defendant­Appellees/Appellants-Cross-Appellee Wagner Engineering Services, Inc. (Wagner) located in Wainiha, Kauai (the property), effectively failed to do so and contained errors of law and clearly erroneous findings of fact. Accordingly, the BLNR’s Amended Decision is vacated. Correspondingly, the October 3, 
2
2012 Judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) ,
upholding the Amended Decision and vacating the March 31, 2011
 Judgment of the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (the court)
3
 
that had sustained the appeal of Petitioners/Plaintiffs­
1(...continued)
§ 205A-42 Determination of the shoreline. The board of
 
land and natural resources shall adopt rules pursuant to
chapter 91 prescribing procedures for determining a
shoreline and appeals of a shoreline determinations;
provided that no determination of a shoreline shall be valid
for a period longer than twelve months, except where the
shoreline is fixed by man-made structures which have been
approved by appropriate government agencies and for which
engineering drawings exist to locate the interface between
the shoreline and the structure.
 
2
 The Honorable Daniel R. Foley, Alexa D.M. Fujise, and Katherine G.
 
Leonard presided.
 
3
 “The court” refers to the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
 
presided over by the Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe.
 
2
         
         
             
            
              
               
            
               
              
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Appellants/Appellees-Cross-Appellees Caren Diamond and Beau Blair
 
(Petitioners) as against the said BLNR Amended Decision, is also
 vacated. For the reasons stated herein we vacate the court’s
 March 31, 2011 Judgment in part. We remand to the court, with
 instructions to remand the case to the BLNR for proceedings
 consistent with this opinion.
 I. 
A.
 
The Shoreline Certification Process
 
In 1986, the legislature enacted Act 258, which amended
 
HRS chapter 205A, governing coastal zones. 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws
 
Act 258, § 1 at 466-68. As part of Act 258, the legislature
 amended the definition of “shoreline” found in HRS § 205A-1
 (Supp. 2005) to read as follows: “‘Shoreline’ means the upper
 reaches of the wash of the waves, other than storm or tidal
 waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which the
 highest wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by the edge
 of the vegetation growth, or the upper limit of debris left by
 the wash of the waves.”
4 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 258, § 2 at
 
469 (emphasis in original). That section also defines “shoreline
 area” as “all of the land area between the shoreline and the
 
4
 This amendment is consistent with this court’s decision in County 
of Hawai 'i v. Sotomura , 55 Haw. 176, 182, 517 P.2d 57, 62 (1973), discussed 
infra. Sotomura clarified the definition of “shoreline” in HRS § 205A-1 for 
purposes of a shoreline certification, holding that, “as a matter of law . . . 
where the wash of the waves is marked by both a debris line and a vegetationline lying further mauka[] , the presumption is that the upper reaches of the
wash of the waves over the course of a year lies along the line marking the
edge of the vegetation growth .” 55 Haw. at 182, 517 P.2d at 62 (emphases 
added).
 
3
         
      
      
      
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shoreline setback line . . . .” HRS § 205A-41 (2001 Repl.). The
 
“shoreline setback line” is “that line established in [HRS
 Chapter 250, Part III] or by the county running inland from the
 shoreline at a horizontal plane.” Id.
 
HRS § 205A-42 authorizes the BLNR  to “adopt rules
 
pursuant to chapter 91 prescribing procedures for determining a
 shoreline and appeals of shoreline determinations[.]” Pursuant
 to this statutory mandate, the BLNR adopted, inter alia, Hawai' i 
5
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-222-10 (2003)  , setting forth the
procedure for shoreline certification, and HAR § 13-222-26 
6
(2003) , describing the process for appealing a shoreline
5 HAR § 13-222-10 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 13-222-10 Review, revision and certification .
 
(a) The  state  land  surveyor  shall  review  the  map,
using  the  photographs,  other  documents  and  information
provided  by  the  applicant,  and  the  state  land
surveyor’s  knowledge  of  the  affected  area  to  determine
the  shoreline.
 
. . . .
 
(d) When  satisfied  with  the  location  of  the
 
shoreline,  the  state  land  surveyor  shall  transmit  the
shoreline  maps  to  the  chairperson  [of  the  BLNR]  for
his  approval  and  signature.
(e) This  map  shall  be  the  proposed  shoreline
certification.   The  public  notice  of  this  proposed
shoreline  certification  shall  be  made  in  accordance
 
with  section  13-222-12.
 
. . . .
  
(g)  If  an  appeal  is  filed  under  section  13-222-26,
the  certification  process  shall  be  stayed  until  the
administrative  appeal  is  resolved  by  the  [BLNR]  or
chairperson  [of  the  BLNR].
 
6
 HAR § 13-222-26 provides, in relevant part:
 § 13-222-26 Appeal of shoreline certification .
 
(a) Upon  timely  application,  the  following  persons
or  agencies  may  have  standing  to  appeal:
 
. . . .
  
(4)	 Other  persons  or  agencies  who  can  show  a
(continued...)
 
4
         
  
 
        
       
           
           
           
            
          
           
              
          
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
certification. 
B. 
2005 Shoreline Certification Application
 
On June 27, 2005, Esaki Surveying and Mapping, Inc.
 
filed an application for Shoreline Certification with the DLNR on
behalf of Jeffrey Galloway (Galloway), the owner of the property. The purpose of the Shoreline Certification was to obtain a
 Building Permit.
7 Galloway’s application was transmitted to
 
State of Hawai' i Department of Accounting and General Services  
(DAGS) Surveyor Reid Siarot (Siarot). See HAR § 13-222-10(a)
 
6(...continued)
substantial  interest  in  the  matter;  provided
that  the  [BLNR]  or  chairperson  [of  the  BLNR]  may
grant  standing  only  if  the  person’s  or  agency’s
participation  will  substantially  assist  the
board  or  chairperson  in  its  decision  making.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Any  person  or  agency  wishing  to  appeal  shall
file  a  notice  of  appeal  in  writing  with  the  department
no  later  than  20  calendar  days  from  the  date  of  the
public  notice  of  the  proposed  shoreline  certification
or  rejection.
(d) The  notice  of  appeal  shall  state  the  legal  and
factual  basis  for  the  appeal.
(e) Upon  determination  that  a  person  or  agency  has
standing  to  appeal,  the  chairperson  [of  the  BLNR]  by
written  order  shall  set  forth  the  schedule  for  the
 
briefs  and  requirements  for  the  briefs.
(f)  The  sole  issue  on  appeal  shall  be  whether  the
proposed  shoreline  certification  or  rejection  was
proper.
 . . . .
 
7
 The purpose of the shoreline certification process is “to
 
standardize the application procedure for shoreline certifications for
purposes of implementing the shoreline setback law and other related laws.”
HAR § 13-222-1 (2003). HRS § 205A-43(a) (2001 Repl.) provides that
“[s]etbacks along shorelines are established of not less than twenty feet and
not more than forty feet inland from the shoreline.” The “shoreline setback
 lines,” along with the certified shoreline, dictate the location of the
“shoreline area”, an area where there are limitations on the structures that
may be built. See HRS § 205A-44 (2001 Repl.) (“[e]xcept as provided in this
section, structures are prohibited in the shoreline area without a variance
pursuant to this part.”).
 
5
         
           
          
 
         
            
  
      
     
       
      
      
    
        
   
    
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2003) (“The state land surveyor shall review the . . .
 
information provided by the applicant[.]”). 
Petitioners and Barbara Robeson sent a letter to Siarot
 
requesting that a site visit be conducted during the winter
 months to determine the appropriate shoreline. On April 12,
 2006, Siarot sent a letter to the DLNR stating that he had
 inspected the shoreline at the site, and that Dennis Esaki
 (Galloway’s surveyor), Petitioners, and others “participated in
 the site inspection.” Siarot stated that, “[a]s a result of the
 inspection, the shoreline was determined to be at the debris line
 
8	 9
near the mauka[ ] edge of the naupaka[ ] hedge, further mauka
than deliniated on the map. Mr. Esaki was advised to revise his
 maps and photographs.” (Emphasis added.) Because Dennis Eskai
 had failed to return his calls or provide the requested
 information during a period of six months, Siarot recommended
 
10
 that, in accordance with HAR § 13-222-7(b)(15) and (I) (2003) ,
8 “Mauka” means “inland”. See Mary Kawena Pukui & Sameul H. Elbert,
 
Hawaiian Dictionary 242, 365 (2d ed. 1986) [hereinafter Pukui & Elbert,
Hawaiian Dictionary ].
 
9 “Naupaka” is “a spreading, succulent shrub found on coasts of
 
tropical Asia and some islands in the Pacific.” Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian
 
Dictionary , at 263.
 
10 HAR § 13-222-7 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§ 13-222-7 Application .
 
(a) Application for shoreline certification shall be in
writing, addressed and mailed to the [BLNR].
(b) The application shall contain the following :
 
. . . .
 
6. Maps of the shoreline to be certified, in
accordance with Section 9.
 
. . . .
 
15.	 Any other information requested by
 
(continued...)
 
6
         
       
    
   
          
        
       
       
         
       
         
         
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Galloway’s application be rejected. Galloway subsequently sold
 
the property.
 
2008 Shoreline Certification Application
 
On January 11, 2008, Dobbin and Wagner filed a
 
Shoreline Certification application with the DLNR for the same
 property. 
The purpose of the certification was to obtain a
 
building permit for Dobbin, the new owner of the property. The
 DLNR accepted the application and transmitted it to Siarot. The
 application was also submitted for publication in the Office of
 Environmental Quality Control (OEQC) Environmental Notice, to
 allow for public comment. 
As with the 2005 shoreline certification, Petitioners
 
sent a letter to Siarot requesting a site visit inspection and
 suggested that Siarot review his previous photographs and file
 for the property because of “[n]aupaka enroachment issues,
 
10(...continued)
the [DLNR] or the state land surveyor as
reasonably necessary to evaluate the
application.
 
. . . .
 (I) If, upon review of an application, the [DLNR] or the
state land surveyor finds: (1) noncompliance with any rule
under this chapter, (2) irregularity in surveying methods
utilized, or (3) the application or any information
submitted by the applicant to be in error or a
misrepresentation of the facts, then the application shall
be denied and returned to the applicant, the 90-day time
period shall cease, and the applicant shall be required to
resubmit a new application.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
7
         
           
         
       
          
         
        
        
        
       
        
      
     
         
       
       
          
         
         
  
            
          
 
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11
 planted beach heliotropes[ ], [and a] shoreline too seaward . .
. .” On April 18, 2008, a site visit was conducted. A report of
 the site visit (report) indicates that the survey personnel were
 Siarot, Ian Hirokawa (Hirokawa), and Chris Conger, who were
 accompanied by Petitioners and Ron Wagner. The report differed
 from the shoreline location recommended by Siarot in 2005, that
 “was considerably mauka” of the ocean:
 
Shoreline: . . . . The profile started to mauka with a
12
graded area in the lawn; then moved makai[ ] to the
berm of graded sand; then the orange construction
fence; the start of the naupaka hedge and back of the
dune, St. Augustine grass and Iron Wood debris on the
west side; the dune crest and contact between old
accumulated Iron Wood debris and fresh Iron Wood and
 other debris; the makai edge of the hedge ([n]aupaka,
beach heliotrope, spider lily) and debris; beach face;
recent debris line (cobble and gravel)
; 
the berm crest
and  berm  face;  makai  edge  of  sand  and  start  of  beach
rock;  and  most  makai  was  the  beach  rock  ridge  and
swash  zone.
 
. . . .
  
Decision: Recommended the proposed shoreline for
certification. A 
different location, considerably
farther mauka on the back of the frontal dune, was
identified as the shoreline location during an October
19, 2005 site visit (KA-034-2A) by Dolan Eversole,
Chris Conger, [] Siarot, and Morris Atta. There is no
 evidence that the wash of the waves has extended that
 far mauka in the past two winters, especially the most
recent winter season .
 
(Emphases added.) Siarot sent a letter dated May 28, 2008 to the
 
DLNR, Land Division Administrator, Morris M. Atta, recommending
 that “the State of Hawai' i should have no objections to adopting 
the dune crest as the shoreline as delineated on the map prepared
 by [Wagner].” 
11
 “Heliotrope” is defined as “any of a genus of herbs or shrubs of
 
the borage family.” Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 539 (10th ed.
 
1993).
 
12
 “Makai” means “on the seaside, toward the sea, in the direction of
 
the sea.” Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary , at 114.
 
8
         
        
           
              
            
           
          
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Notice of Appeal to the BLNR
 
On June 8, the proposed shoreline certification for the
 
property was published in the OEQC bulletin, and on June 27,
 
2008, Petitioners filed a Shoreline Certification - Notice of
 Appeal, stating that “[t]he proposed shoreline certification does
 not properly or accurately locate the shoreline according to the
 upper reaches of the wash of the waves at high tide during the
 season of the year when the highest wash of the waves occurs.” 
On September 17, 2008, Hirokawa, a Project Development Specialist
 with the Land Division of DLNR, recommended to Laura Thielen, at
 that time the Chairperson of the BLNR (Chairperson Thielen), that
 the BLNR grant Petitioners standing to appeal the shoreline
 
13
 application  and also grant Dobbin and Wagner standing to
participate in the appeal. Chairperson Thielen approved the
 recommendation on September 22, 2008, and issued an order
 notifying the parties of standing, the briefing schedule, limits
 on ex parte communications, and the potential for site
 inspections. 
In their brief to the BLNR, Petitioners cited to HRS §
 
205A-1, which as stated, provides the statutory definition of
 “shoreline,” and argued that “[e]ach year, depending upon the
 size and direction of the swells, the winter waves repeatedly
 
13
 The order attached to the recommendation stated that an
 
organization called “North Shore Ohana” with an address that was “c/o Barbara
 
Robeson” was deemed not to have standing in the matter due to its failure to
present evidence or facts sufficient to establish a prima facie case to grant
standing. Barbara Robeson was the other person, in addition to Petitioners,
who had requested a site inspection for the property when Galloway’s
application was under consideration.
 
9
         
          
          
           
            
            
         
         
        
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
wash well into and beyond the currently proposed shoreline for
 
[the property].” With respect to their contention that
 Respondents Dobbin and Wagner’s proposed shoreline did not
 represent the shoreline in accordance with the definition at HRS
 § 205A-1, Petitioners argued several points. First, they alleged
 that their evidence, in the form of photographs, was the “most
 credible” and that Siarot incorrectly located the shoreline
 “based solely in this case, upon ‘on the ground evidence,’ at the
 time of the April 18, 2008 site visit.” (Emphases in original.) 
Second, Petitioners averred that “the State Surveyor ignore[d]
 his own recommendations of October 19, 2005, and further
 ignore[d] the importance of the historical evidence which
 confirms the Surveyor’s previous location of the shoreline . . .
 .” (Emphases in original.) They stated that, “[s]imply put, the
 DLNR’s current determination of the shoreline based upon a
 limited one year time frame, i.e. the particular year for which
 the certification is sought, is wrong as a matter of law.” 
In support of these first two arguments, Petitioners
 
14
 contended that the exhibits they provided,  including
photographic evidence, demonstrated the highest wash of the
 waves, and that the naupaka and heliotrope trees on the property
 
14
 Petitioners provided, as exhibits to their brief to the BLNR, (1)
 
Wagner’s proposed shoreline certification map for the property, (2) a December
26, 2007 proposed shoreline certification map for the property, (3) a number
of photographs, (4) Siarot’s letter dated April 12, 2006, (5) an email from
DLNR employee Chris Conger dated May 30, 2008, and (6) testimony from Charles
“Chipper” Wichman, Director of Limahuli Garden and Preserve, regarding naupaka
plants (Wichman testimony). Petitioners also attached declarations from Beau
 Blair (Blair declaration), Caren Diamond (Diamond declaration), and Barbara
Robeson (Robeson declaration).
 
10
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
were acting as a “‘barrier’ which [was] prevent[ing] and[/]or
 
hinder[ing] the observation of the true evidence of the debris
 line created by the upper wash of the winter waves.” (Emphases
 in original.) They alleged that the naupaka and other salt
 tolerant plants evidenced in the photographs were being used to
 create an artificial shoreline and resulted in a vegetation line
 that did not represent the “highest wash of the waves.” 
Finally, Petitioners contended that using the
 
“artificial shoreline,” represented by the vegetation line on the
 property, as the certified shoreline was against public policy. 
They suggested that this court has held “that public policy
 ‘favors extending to public use and ownership as much of Hawaii’s
 shoreline as is reasonably possible[,]’” (quoting Sotomura, 55
 Haw. at 180, 517 P.2d at 61), and that their proposed shoreline,
 based on the 2005 State Surveyor recommendations, was in accord
 with this policy.
 Dobbin and Wagner Brief in Support of Their Proposed Shoreline
 
On November 12, 2008, Dobbin and Wagner filed their
 
answering brief with the BLNR. First, they alleged that
 “[a]lthough the [DLNR] has historically been lenient in
 permitting lay witnesses to testify as to factual underpinnings,
 the ultimate determination of the upper reaches of the wash of
 the waves at high tide in the season of the year in which the
 highest wash of the waves occurs is one for experts and those
 qualified under the law.” Thus, they related, the determination
 
11
         
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of the property shoreline as made by the licensed surveyor
 
(Wagner), and as reviewed by Siarot and DNLR personnel, should be
 “afforded deference” as a matter of administrative law. 
Second, Dobbin and Wagner argued that Wagner’s
 
determination of the shoreline, as affirmed by the State Surveyor
 and DLNR personnel was “supported by substantial evidence and
 complie[d] with all applicable statutory and regulatory
 requirements.” Dobbin and Wagner contended that the proposed
 certified shoreline satisfied the two relevant indicators in the
 statutory definition of “shoreline” as set forth in HRS § 205A-1
 -- the vegetation line and the upper limit of debris. They
 maintained that there were mature ironwoods and naupaka
 established makai of the dune crest and that the debris shown in
 Petitioners’ photos had originated from “falling branches and
 needles along the shoreline[,]” rather than from the wash of the
 waves. According to Dobbin and Wagner, any debris that was from
 the waves had slid down the dune and thus was “back side debris”,
 rather than the “‘upper limit of debris left by the wash of the
 waves.’” (Quoting HRS § 205A-1.) (Emphasis added.) 
In support of the shoreline proposed by Wagner, Dobbin
 
15
 and Wagner attached exhibits  that included (1) an affidavit of
15
 Respondents Dobbin and Wagner attached to their brief (1) the map
 
of  the  proposed  shoreline  prepared  by  Wagner,  (2)  their  original  application
to  the  BLNR  for  shoreline  certification,  (3)  a  copy  of  the  notice  of  proposed
shoreline  certification  in  the  OEQC  Environmental  Notice,  (4)  Petitioners’
Notice  of  Appeal,  (5)  a  declaration  of  Dobbin  (Dobbin  declaration),  (6)  a
declaration  of  Galloway  (Galloway  declaration),  (7)  the  Moody  affidavit,  (8)
the  Shook  affidavit,  (9)  a  copy  of  the  DLNR’s  “Report  to  the  Twenty-Third
Legislature  Regular  Session  of  2006,  Requesting  a  Review  and  Analysis  of  the
(continued...)
 
12
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Steve Moody (Moody affidavit), the owner of the property before
 
Galloway from 2000 to 2004, stating that there was no planting of
 vegetation along the shoreline front at any time; and (2) an
 affidavit of Danny Shook (Shook affidavit), who did landscaping
 work for Moody, stating that the irrigation and sprinklers in
 place “were not aimed towards nor intended to irrigate the
 naturally growing shoreline vegetation.” Dobbin and Wagner
 alleged that Petitioners’ photographs indicated that “none of the
 sprinklers were aimed toward the shoreline vegetation.” With
 respect to Petitioners’ proposed shoreline, Dobbin and Wagner
 contended that Petitioners’ shoreline was completely arbitrary,
 that “[t]here is no admissible proof to support their asserted
 line, nor anything to tie that line to the statutory criteria,”
 and that “the heavy natural growth of the naupaka fronting the
 shoreline renders it impossible to discern any line of debris at
 such a distance from the certified shoreline[.]” 
Third, Respondents Dobbin and Wagner alleged that all
 
of Petitioners’ photographs “purporting to show a debris line
 from years past are irrelevant” because “[a]s a matter of law,
 wave events from past years do not and cannot establish the upper
 reach of the wash of the waves in the season of the year in which
 an applicant submits.” (Citing
 
In re Application of Sanborn, 57
 
15(...continued)
Issues  Surrounding  the  Shoreline  Certification  Process  for  the  Purpose  of
Establishing  Shoreline  Setbacks,”  (DLNR  Report  to  the  Legislature)  and  (10)  a 
“Problem  Statement”  by  Chip  Fletcher,  Geologist  at  the  University  of  Hawai'i, 
created  as  part  of  a  2005  Shoreline  Working  Group.  
13
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Haw. 585, 588, 562 P.2d 771, 773 (1977).) Dobbin and Wagner
 
contended that this interpretation of HRS § 205A-1 was
 appropriate because “[s]tatutes regulating, restraining or
 interfering with private property are subject to a strict
 construction” (citation omitted), and “where the terms of the
 statute are plain, unambiguous and explicit, as in this case, the
 appellate body is not at liberty to look beyond the statutory
 language for a different meaning[,]” (citations omitted). 
They also alleged that this “current year” requirement
 
is recognized in the DLNR Report to the Legislature, in which it
 recommended that the term “‘annual’ means that the wave must have
 a statistical recurrence interval of at least once per year.” 
(internal quotation marks omitted.) According to them, the
 requirement that an application for shoreline certification
 include maps “‘based on an actual field survey conducted within
 ninety (90) days prior to the filing . . . [,]’” (quoting HAR §
 13-222-9(c) (2003)), indicates that the map should be based on
 that year’s field survey alone.
 
Fourth, they contended that even if other years could
 
be considered by the BLNR, the evidence from preceding years of
 “gravity flow down the backside of the dune [on the property]
 [was] insufficient” to establish the “upper reaches of the wash
 of the waves[,]” because a gravity flow of debris down the dune
 does not mark the “upper reaches.” According to Respondents
 Dobbin and Wagner, the statute uses the phrase “upper,” and that
 
14
         
          
             
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interpretation is consistent with the BLNR Report to the
 
Legislature, which states that “‘run up’ means that the water
 position setting the shoreline must be derived exclusively by
 wave energy run-up, and not aided by gravity or funneling through
 narrow passages.”
16 (Internal quotation marks omitted.)
 
(Emphasis in original.) 
Fifth, they argued that the statutory definition of a 
shoreline recognizes the presence of vegetation as a possible shoreline indicia, and that the BLNR should not speculate on how far debris would travel absent intervening vegetation, because that would mean that it gave the debris line preference over the vegetation line, in contravention of Diamond v. State Board of Land & Natural Resources, 112 Hawai' i 161, 174, 145 P.3d 704, 717 
(2006) (Diamond I). In other words, they maintained that if debris was stopped in its movement by the vegetation, the BLNR should allow the area where it stopped to represent the shoreline, rather than prioritizing a hypothetical debris line over an actual vegetation and debris line. The BLNR’s Denial of Petitioners’ Appeal 
On June 17, 2009, Hirokawa transmitted a memorandum to
 
BLNR Chairperson Thielen, recommending that she deny Petitioners’
 appeal, “based upon [Petitioners’] failure to provide evidence to
 support the relocation of the shoreline at their proposed
 
16
 Dobbin and Wagner did not explain how this proposed definition of
 
“run up” from the BLNR Report to the Legislature should be read in conjunction
with other regulations or with the statutory definition of “shoreline.”
 
15
         
          
          
         
    
     
           
        
        
       
       
       
     
          
        
 
            
          
             
            
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
location.” The memorandum stated that “[t]he evidence they
 
provide is largely anecdotal, and the photographs provided, which
 are often undated, do show an increased growth in naupaka and
 various debris lines. However, a closer examination of the
 photographic evidence provided fails to overcome their burden of
 proof to justify moving the shoreline to their proposed
 location.” Attached to the memorandum were the Findings of Fact
 (findings), Conclusions of Law (conclusions), and Decision and
 Order. Chairperson Thielen approved the memorandum on June 19, 
2009.17 
On June 19, 2009, Chairperson Thielen signed the 
memorandum and the “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Decision and Order” (collectively, Decision). She certified the
 shoreline in accordance with Wagner’s map and Hirokawa’s
 recommendation, on June 25, 2009.
 
17 The June 19, 2009 “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 
Decision and Order” began with a preface that distinguished the certified
 
shoreline from the “shoreline property boundaries” and the “private property
 line.“ The BLNR stated,
 
Unlike shoreline property boundaries, certified shorelines
are valid for a period of one year only (with an exception
for shorelines along fixed manmade structures), and may in
fact not coincide in the same location with shoreline
 property boundaries. Similarly, the private property line
that delineates the public’s right of access along
shorelines typically extends further mauka than both the
certified shorelines and shoreline property boundaries
because unlike the latter two, it is not limited by the
exclusion of the effects of hurricanes and tsunamis on
 coastal areas.
 
It appears that by using the phrase “private property line” the BLNR was
 referring to the boundary delininating a “beach transit corridor” pursuant to
 HRS § 115-5 (1993). A “beach transit corridor” designates an area where there
 is a public right of transit “along the shoreline below the private property
 lines[.]” Id. It is unclear what statutory or regulatory definition the BLNR
is referring to when it uses the general term “shoreline property boundaries.”
 
16
         
        
          
           
         
          
        
   
        
         
       
        
       
    
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
II.
 
First Appeal - No. 30573
 
Petitioners appealed the BLNR’s Decision to the court
 
on July 20, 2009. Petitioners challenged a number of the BLNR’s
 
findings and conclusions, and argued that the Decision and Order
 was “arbitrary, capricious, or characterized by an abuse of
 discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion and
 
18
 wrong as a matter of law.” (Quoting HRS § 91-14(g) (1993)  .)  
On March 2, 2010, the court heard oral arguments in the
 
case, and on April 6, 2010, the court entered its “Findings of
 Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order.” 
In its
 
conclusions, the court held, inter alia, that:
 
2. HRS § 205A-1 defines “shoreline” as “the upper reaches
of the wash of the waves, other than storm and seismic
waves, at high tide during the season of the year in which
the highest wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by
the edge of vegetation growth, or the upper limit of debris
left by the wash of the waves.”
 
. . . .
 
18 HRS § 91-14(g) provides:
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may
affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case
with instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
(1)  In  violation  of  constitutional  or  statutory
  
provisions;  or
(2)  In  excess  of  the  statutory  authority  or
 
jurisdiction  of  the  agency;  or
(3)Made  upon  unlawful  procedure;  or
(4)  Affected  by  other  error  of  law;  or
(5)  Clearly  erroneous  in  view  of  the  reliable,
  
probative,  and  substantial  evidence  on  the  whole
 
record;  or
(6)  Arbitrary,  or  capricious,  or  characterized
  
by  abuse  of  discretion  or  clearly  unwarranted
  
exercise  of  discretion.
 
17
         
     
       
       
         
       
      
      
        
           
         
         
           
           
    
      
        
      
      
        
         
          
      
         
         
        
      
   
 
         
           
          
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8. The BLNR’s characterization as either ‘anecdotal
 
evidence and/or unreliable evidence’ with respect to both
the detailed Declarations of [Petitioners and Robeson], and
the photographs they submitted in support of their appeal is
arbitrary, capricious and/or characterized by an abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion,
not in accordance with HAR § 13-222-10 .
 
9. The map of the certified shoreline published on June
8, 2008 and signed by the Chairperson on June 25, 2009 based
upon the “conditions existing on December 4, 2007" does not
 
correctly reflect the “upper reaches of the wash of the
waves at high tide during the season of the year in which
the highest wash of the waves occurs”, as provided in HRS §
205A-1.
 
. . . .
 12. The current certified shoreline appears to incorrectly
allow for the manipulation of the shoreline based upon
artificially induced and enhanced vegetation , not in
accordance with HRS § 205A-1.
 
13. The BLNR’s interpretation of HRS § 205A-1, et. seq.
that only the ”current” year’s evidence of the upper reaches
of the wash of the waves should be considered in determining
the shoreline is arbitrary, capricious and/or characterized
by an abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion in applying HRS § 205A-1, et. seq. , as it
conflicts with and/or contradicts the purpose and intent of
HRS § 205A-1, et. seq.
 
. . . .
 
17. The BLNR’s interpretation of HRS § 205A-1 to limit its
analysis of the upper reaches of the wash of the waves for
only the “current” season is contrary to the intent of the
statute and public policy to preserve as much shore as
reasonably possible for public use.
 
(Emphases added.) In its Decision and Order, the court vacated
 
the BLNR’s initial Decision and remanded to the BLNR with
 “specific instructions to appropriately consider and give due
 weight to [Petitioners’] proposed evidence and to correctly apply
 the applicable statutes, case law and administrative rules . . .
 .” On May 19, 2010, the court entered its judgment in the case. 
Soon thereafter, on June 17, 2010 Dobbin and Wagner
 
appealed from the court’s final judgment to the ICA (first
 
18
         
        
      
         
         
      
       
      
       
          
         
      
    
       
      
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
appeal), and the BLNR filed a cross-appeal on June 21, 2012. 
III.
 
The BLNR’s Amended Decision
 
In the meantime, on May 21, 2010 in conjunction with
 
the court’s remand, the BLNR filed its Amended Decision. In
 
addition to revising, to some extent, the findings in its first
 decision, the BLNR added additional findings and conclusions.
 Among the changes was the addition of a section in the findings
 titled “Prior Application for Shoreline Certification,” which
 discussed the DLNR’s actions with respect to the 2005 Galloway
 application. The new findings also included,
 
inter alia
, the
 
following statements:
 
27. The DLNR and State Surveyor also incorporate in their
shoreline determination, any pertinent information about the
shoreline that is presented by the owner of the subject
property and any other member of the public that has
personal knowledge and familiarity 
w
ith the shoreline
conditions of the subject property during high surf
conditions in the season of high surf.
 
. . . .
  
37. During  the  site  visit  the  State  Surveyor  and
DLNR  staff  noted  that  a  different  location,  on  the
back  of  the  frontal  dune,  was  identified  during  a
previous  site  visit  on  October  19,  2005;  which  was
considerably  further  mauka  than  the  proposed  shoreline
location  in  the  Dobbin  application.
 
3
8. The State Surveyor and DLNR staff also noted
that there was no evidence that the wash of the waves
 
had extended that far mauka in the past two winters,
especially not during the immediately preceding winter
season.
 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE STATE SURVEYOR
 
39. On  May  28,  2008,  in  a  letter  to  the  [DLNR],  the
State  Surveyor  stated  that  the  State  of  Hawai'i  had  no 
objections  to  adopting  the  dune  crest  as  the  shoreline
location,  as  delineated  on  the  map  prepared  by  []
Wagner. 40. This recommendation was based, at least in part,
on the Galloway application, the Dobbin application,
and the site inspection conducted on April 18, 2008.
 
19
         
       
       
       
      
    
     
   
       
       
       
      
        
     
   
    
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
41. At the time of the recommendation, the State
Surveyor was aware that two years prior the
recommended location of the shoreline for the []
[p]roperty was further mauka than the current
location.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Amended Decision included a separate section of
 
findings setting forth in more detail the evidence presented by
 
Petitioners, and the BLNR’s evaluation of that evidence. For
 example, the findings stated,
 
inter alia
, with respect to the
  
Blair Declaration, that:
 
46. [Petitioner]  Blair’s  testimony  did  not  refer  to
specific  observations  she  made  of  the  shoreline,
either  as  to  the  location  of  the  highest  wash  of  the
waves  or  any  dates  when  these  high  tides  occurred.
 
4
7. [Petitioner] Blair also testified regarding
photographs which were attached to [Petitioners’]
Opening Brief at 9-12.
 
48. The  photographs  contained  in  Exhibits  G  through
N  of  [Petitioners’]  Opening  Brief  are  date  stamped,
either  on  the  photos  or  in  the  captions,  with  dates
falling  between  2004  and  2008.
 
49. [Petitioner]  Blair  testified  that  the  photos
 
show  “the  upper  reaches  of  the  wash  of  the  waves
during  the  season  of  the  year  in  which  the  highest
wash  of  the  waves  occurs  on  the  Dobbin  property.”  []
 
50. The  photos  enumerated  in  [Petitioner]  Blair’s
testimony  do  not  all  contain  depictions  of  waves.
 
51. It is not possible to ascertain from [Petitioner]
Blair’s testimony what was the object of specific
photographs or what they were purported to portray .
 
52. [Petitioner] Blair’s testimony did not contain any
information as to the dates when specific photographs were
taken or who took the photographs.
 
. . . .
 56. [Petitioner] Blair’s and [Petitioner] Diamond’s
testimony do not clearly identify what each photograph is
purporting to depict.
 
(Emphases added.) Similarly, the Amended Decision set forth the
 
20
         
     
        
        
  
        
         
         
        
        
          
          
          
 
     
        
          
       
      
   
       
         
           
          
        
        
  
         
         
         
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
evidence provided by Respondents Dobbin and Wagner in a section
 
titled, “Evidence Presented by Appellees Dobbin[][,]” although
 this section did not discuss the DLNR’s evaluation of that
 evidence. The new and revised findings on Dobbin and Wagner’s
 evidence included, inter alia,
 
69. [Respondents] Dobbin and Wagner’s Opening Brief
refuted the assertions that the vegetation growing along the
shoreline was planted and “induced” with the aid of
 irrigation. []
 
70. [Respondents]  Dobbin  and  Wagner,  as  part  of  their
Answering  Brief,  presented  an  affidavit  and  a  couple  of
declarations  from  people  who  had  owned  the  []  [p]roperty
during  the  period  from  2000  to  present.  []
  
71. The current and prior owners all denied ever planting
anything along the makai side of the [] [p]roperty . []
 
72. [Moody], the owner of the [] [p]roperty from 2000 to
2004, admitted to having an irrigation system [on] the
property, but he testified that the system was located
several feet away from the edge of the naupaka growing along
the shoreline and that all of the sprinkler heads were aimed
so the spray would be parallel to or away from the
shoreline. []
 
73. [Respondent] Dobbin also submitted testimony from
[Shook], the contractor for [Moody], who testified that when
he was hired in late 2003 there [were] already naupaka and
ironwood trees, with possibly beach heliotropes and wedelia,
growing closest to the shoreline . []
 
. . . .
 
75. [Shook] also testified that an irrigation system was
installed on the [] [p]roperty for the purpose of irrigating
the lawn and that the sprinkler heads were aimed so that the
spray pattern would be in a mauka direction or parallel to
the shoreline in a deliberate attempt to avoid the
irrigation of the naupaka and other vegetation growing along
the shoreline. []
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The BLNR’s conclusions stated, inter alia,
 
5. HRS § 205A-1 and HAR § 13-222-2 defines the shoreline
 
as:
 
[T]he upper wash of the waves, other than storm and
seismic waves, at high tide during the season of the
year in which the highest wash of the waves occurs,
 
21
         
        
          
   
      
       
          
    
        
        
       
          
   
      
        
 
         
              
          
            
               
        
             
           
          
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation growth, or
the upper limit of debris left by the wash of the
19
waves.[ ]
. . . .
 
7. Shoreline certifications are expressly limited to a
twelve month validity period, except in the circumstance
where there is a legal artificial structure. HRS § 205A­
20
42(a) and HAR § 13-222-11.[ ]
9. The multi-variable approach used by the DLNR and State
Surveyor is the most reasonable and appropriate method for
determining the location of the shoreline for shoreline
certification purposes pursuant to HRS § 205A-1 and HAR §
 13-222-2.
 
. . . .
 11. [Petitioners] failed to establish by a preponderance
of the evidence that the proposed certified shoreline was
not proper.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
IV.
 
Appeal from the BLNR’s Amended Decision - CAAP-11-000345
 
On May 25, 2010, Petitioners filed a Notice of Appeal
 
to the circuit court,21 appealing the BLNR’s Amended Decision
 
(second appeal). On August 3, 2010, the circuit court granted
 
Petitioners’ July 1, 2010 Motion to Reassign Case, and reassigned
 the case to the court that heard the first appeal. 
A.
 
Petitioners filed their opening brief on September 30,
 
19
 As will be discussed infra, this definition, apparently quoted, is
 
not actually what is provided by HRS § 205A-1 and HAR § 13-222-2. Those
 
provisions differ from the BLNR’s recitation, in that they state that
“‘shoreline’ means the upper reaches of the washes of the waves ,” rather than
 
the BLNR’s quote which states that it is “the upper wash of the waves.” See
 
HRS § 205A-1 and HAR § 13-222-2.
 
20
 It is noted that there was no COL No. 8 in the BLNR’s Amended
 
Decision. The COLs went directly from No. 7 to No. 9.
 
21
 “Circuit court” refers to the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
 
presided over by the Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano.
 
22
         
          
          
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2010, alleging that the Amended Decision “clearly is not
 
consistent with the [c]ourt’s April 6, 2010 Decision and Order,
 and constitutes an unwarranted abuse of the Chairperson’s
 discretion in recertifying the shoreline in the same place as
 previously vacated by [the] [c]ourt.” (Emphases in original.)
 Petitioners reiterated their arguments from their previous
 appeal, contending that the new findings in the Amended Decision
 relating to the characterization of Petitioners’ evidence were
 clearly erroneous and an abuse of discretion, and concluding that
 the recertification of the shoreline to the same location as
 previously vacated by the court was arbitrary, capricious or
 characterized by an abuse of discretion. 
Dobbin and Wagner filed their answering brief on
 
November 9, 2010, averring that the BLNR adhered to the court’s
 directions in its April 6, 2010 Decision and Order, gave due
 weight to the evidence of Petitioners, and correctly applied the
 applicable law in confirming Dobbin and Wagner’s proposed
 shoreline. The BLNR’s answering brief was also filed on November
 9, 2010, alleging that its determination of the shoreline
 location was entitled to deference, and that its interpretation
 HRS § 205A-42 as the location of the high tide during the season
 of the current year in which the highest wash of the waves occurs
 was not arbitrary and capricious.
22 Petitioners filed a reply
 
22
 Despite arguing in favor of a “current year” interpretation of HRS
 
§ 205A-42, the BLNR had indicated that it took Petitioners’ historical
 
evidence, which included the past years’ wash of the waves, into account in
(continued...)
 
23
         
      
       
      
      
   
      
        
         
           
        
         
  
     
     
     
       
      
  
    
             
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
brief on November 24, 2010, concluding, inter alia, that “[t]he
 
BLNR’s decision that [Petitioners] have not provided evidence to
 meet its burden of proof as to the location of the shoreline is
 in and of itself incredible.” (Emphasis in original.)
 
B.
 
The court heard oral arguments in the second appeal on
 
January 5, 2011. Each of the parties was asked to submit
 proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and a proposed
 order. On February 16, 2011, the court entered its Findings of
 Fact (findings), Conclusions of Law (conclusions), Decision and
 Order (collectively, Second Decision) in this second appeal. The
 court’s findings included, inter alia,
 
33. The vegetation planted on Lot 12 during
December, 2003, and January and February, 2004 has
been artificially induced by human intervention and
does not represent evidence of the shoreline .
 
. . . .
 
40. The evidence submitted by [Petitioners], including the
photographs, clearly shows that the “upper reaches of the
waves, other than storm and seismic waves, at high tide
during the season of the year in which the highest wash of
the waves occurs” reaches further mauka onto [the property]
 than the BLNR’s “current” location of the shoreline at the
 
“dune crest.”
 
(Emphases added.) The court included the following conclusions,
 
8. The BLNR’s characterization as unreliable the
 
evidence with respect to both [Petitioners’
declarations], and the photographs submitted in
support of the appeal is arbitrary, capricious, and
constitutes an abuse of discretion or unwarranted
 exercise of discretion.
 
. . . . 
22(...continued)
making its determination. 
historical evidence. The BLNR argued that less weight should be given to 
24         
        
        
         
        
      
       
         
    
   
     
      
      
   
 
       
         
       
       
     
      
       
    
      
        
       
         
        
   
      
       
       
        
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10. The vegetation planted on lot 12 in 2003 and
2004 was planted seaward of the shoreline as located
by [] Siarot, State Surveyor at the October 19, 2005
site visit to the subject property. This artificially
induced and enhanced vegetation is incorrectly being
used to currently locate the shoreline and/or hinder
the true evidence of the location of the shoreline in
 accordance with HRS § 205A-1.
 
. . . .
 12. The May 21, 2010 recertified shoreline
incorrectly allows for the manipulation of the
shoreline based on artificially induced and enhanced
vegetation.
 
. . . .
 23. The BLNR’s interpretation of HRS § 205A-1 and
HRS § 205A-42 which is based upon the limited duration
of a shoreline certification in conjunction with the
definition of shoreline, and which requires that the
BLNR’s certified shoreline determination reflect the
 “current” location of the shoreline is arbitrary,
capricious and constitutes an abuse of discretion or
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
(Emphases added.) Finally, it set forth its Decision and Order,
 
as provided below.
 
1. The  BLNR’s  [Amended  Decision]  is  hereby  reversed
and  vacated.
 
2
. The certified shoreline as delineated on the
 
shoreline survey map for the subject property that was
published for final certification in the OEQC Bulletin
on June 8, 2008 and reapproved and reaffirmed by the
BLNR’s Chairperson, [] Thielen on May 21, 2010 is
hereby reversed and vacated .
 
3. The shoreline for [the property] should be
located approximately 20 feet mauka of the shoreline
as shown on the shoreline certification map published
for final certification on June 8, 2008 and resigned
by the Chairperson on May 21, 2010.
 
4. Any  further  certified  shoreline  proceedings
before  the  BLNR  for  [the  property]  shall  be  consistent
with  this  [c]ourt’s  Findings  of  Fact;  Conclusions  of
Law;  Decision  and  Order.
  
(Emphases added.) The court entered its judgment on March 31,
 
2011.
 
25
         
       
          
        
       
        
      
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In the second appeal, Dobbin and Wagner and the BLNR
 
appealed the judgment to the ICA, challenging the court’s order
 
vacating the BLNR’s Amended Decision and locating the shoreline
 “approximately 20 feet mauka.” 
V.
 
ICA Opinion
 
The ICA issued an order on August 25, 2011 granting
 
Petitioners’ motion to consolidate the first and second appeals,
 No. 30573 and CAAP 11-0000345, and ordering the parties to file
 briefs for CAAP-11-0000345. On August 31, 2012, the ICA issued
 its Memorandum Opinion in the consolidated cases on August 31,
 2012. Diamond v. Dobbin, Nos. 30573 & CAAP-11-0000345, 2012 WL
 
3792024, at *1 (App. Aug. 31, 2012) (mem.). It observed that on a
 secondary appeal from an administrative agency decision, 
the appellate court will utilize identical standards applied
by the circuit court. Questions of fact are reviewed under
 the “clearly erroneous” standard. In contrast, an agency’s
legal conclusions are freely reviewable. An agency’s
interpretation of its rules receives deference unless it is
plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the underlying
legislative purpose.
 
Id. (quoting Hawai' i Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 996 v. 
Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai' i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 
368, 374 (2006)). First, the ICA concluded that the court had 
“engaged in unwarranted fact[-]finding and weighing of the evidence.” Id. It held that, contrary to the court’s conclusion 
8, set forth supra, the BLNR did not “disregard” the evidence 
26
         
           
           
           
               
            
               
          
              
               
            
           
          
                   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
submitted by Petitioners.23 Id. Rather, the BLNR found the
 
findings of the DLNR and the State Surveyor that were based on
 
the 2008 site visit, to be persuasive. Id. The ICA indicated
 
that the BLNR had acknowledged in its Amended Decision that the
 DLNR and State Surveyor had identified a shoreline further mauka
 in response to the Galloway application, and that the BLNR had
 addressed this by noting that there was no evidence that the
 waves had extended to the October 19, 2005 shoreline in the
 previous two winters. Id. According to the ICA, the “BLNR was
 
presented with adequate evidence supporting its ultimate
 shoreline determination, and as such, its findings were not
 clearly erroneous.” Id. “Therefore,” the ICA held, “the []
 
court erred in failing to give proper deference to [the] BLNR’s
 findings of facts in certifying the shoreline boundary.” Id. 
Second, the ICA concluded that the court improperly
 
characterized the BLNR’s findings as only taking into
 consideration evidence from the current year’s upper reaches of
 the wave. Id. at *5. In accordance with the BLNR’s Amended
 
Decision, the ICA reasoned that the BLNR “did not restrict its
 
23 Respectfully, the ICA opinion is not entirely clear as to which of
 
the appeals it is addressing with respect to the court’s “unwarranted fact
 
finding,” although it initially states that “we do not address the issues
 raised in [No.] 30573.” 2012 WL 3792024, at *3. First, it states that the
court engaged in unwarranted fact finding in its second appeal, and cites to
findings 28 through 40 in that Decision and Order. Id. Then, the ICA states
 
that “[b]ased on the evidence submitted by [Petitioners] the [] court
concluded that . . . [,]” and quotes two conclusions from the court’s April 6,
2010 Decision and Order in the first appeal. Id. at *4. Later in the
 
opinion, the ICA identifies findings 27 through 38 and conclusions 8 and 9
from the first appeal, stating that the court erred in making those
determinations, and then quotes language that is found in the BLNR’s
conclusions in both the first and second appeal. Id. at *4-5.
 
27
         
 
          
            
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
analysis of the upper reaches of the waves to the current year, 
but rather, ‘took into evaluation all relevant factors present on the [p]roperty.’” Id. (brackets omitted). Thus, it held that 
the BLNR’s analysis, taking into account all relevant factors, was not contrary to the definition of “shoreline boundary” in HRS § 205A-1, because both the debris line and vegetation line are “used as evidence to determine the shoreline, depending on the location and stability of each line.” Id. (citing Diamond, 112 
Hawai'i at 175, 145 P.3d at 718). 
VI.
 
On December 3, 2012, Petitioners filed their 
Application to this court. They ask whether the ICA gravely erred (1) “in its [f]ailure to [c]onsider and [a]pply [this court’s d]ecision in Paul’s Elec[tric] Serv[ice] Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 91 P.3d 494 (2004)[,] . . . with respect to the 
‘deference,’ if any, the [] [c]ourt should have afforded the [BLNR] in the [] [c]ourt’s review of the BLNR’s . . . location of the ‘shoreline’ pursuant to HRS [§] 205A-1, et. seq.”; (2) “in its [i]nterpretation and [a]pplication of . . . [Diamond I], with respect to the . . . determination of the shoreline . . . .”; and (3) “in [c]oncluding that the [] [c]ourt’s 2010 Judgment in Civil
 No. 09-1-0197 [No. 30573] was [r]endered [m]oot when the BLNR
 filed its Amended Decision [] on May 21, 2010.”
24
 
24
 On December 18, 2012, the BLNR filed a Response Brief (Response),
 
arguing that the ICA properly determined that the court should not have made
its own determinations by weighing the evidence on appeal, and that regardless
(continued...)
 
28
         
          
           
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VII.
 
Preliminarily, the mootness issue must be addressed, 
inasmuch as it affects the relevancy of the proceedings below to 
the instant appeal. “The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit previously suitable for determination.” Wong v. Bd. of Regents, 
Univ. of Haw., 62 Haw. 391, 394, 616 P.2d 201, 203 (1980). Hence, “[a] case is moot if the reviewing court can no longer grant effective relief.” Kaho'ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai' i 
302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007) (brackets in original) (citations omitted). However, this court has also “recognized an exception to the mootness doctrine in cases involving questions that affect the public interest and are ‘capable of repetition yet evading review.’” Diamond I, 112 Hawai' i at 170, 145 P.3d at 
713 (quoting Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 99 Hawai'i 191, 196, 53 P.3d 799, 804 (2002) (citations omitted)). 
Petitioners allege in their Questions Presented and in 
footnote 3 of their Application, that the court’s May 19, 2010 Judgment entered on the first appeal, No. 30573, is not moot. (Citing Diamond I, 112 Hawai' i at 171-72, 145 P.3d at 714-15.) 
Diamond I addressed a similar factual situation to the one presented here, involving shoreline certifications. As stated, 
24(...continued)
of Petitioners’ citation to Paul’s Electric , the BLNR should be afforded
deference in its decision based on a multi-variable approach. The Response
also alleged that the ICA properly determined that the BLNR’s Amended Decision
rendered the first appeal moot.
 
29
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
under the relevant statutory scheme, a particular shoreline 
certification is only valid for one year. See HRS § 205A-42 
(“[N]o determination of a shoreline shall be valid for a period longer twelve months.”) In Diamond I, this court considered whether it could hear an appeal from a decision of the BLNR related to shoreline certification, despite the fact that the shoreline certification at issue had expired. 112 Hawai' i at 
172, 145 P.3d at 715. 
We determined the case was not moot because the
 
shoreline certification satisfied the elements of the public
 interest exception to the mootness doctrine, specifically, it was
 “a matter of vast public importance” and was “‘capable of
 repetition yet evading review.’” Id. (citing Okada Trucking Co.
 
v. Bd. of Water Supply, 99 Hawai' i 191, 196-97, 53 P.3d 799, 804­
05 (2002)). Given that any shoreline certification would only be valid for one year, and that “the appeals process generally takes more than one year,” Diamond I recognized that appellate review would be frustrated if it determined that the appeal was moot. Therefore, Diamond I applied the exception to the mootness doctrine. 
This case is unlike Diamond I with respect to the
 
mootness issue. None of the parties appear to dispute the issue
 of whether this court may hear the appeal from the BLNR’s
 ultimate shoreline determination. Instead, the issue is simply
 whether this court still must consider the court’s decision on
 
30
         
  
           
           
          
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
appeal from the BLNR’s first shoreline determination, No. 30573. 
Here, the BLNR’s May 21, 2010 Amended Decision replaced
 
the BLNR’s original June 19, 2009 Decision. The issuance of the
 
Amended Decision effectively “destroyed justiciability” of the
 prior appeal from the court’s judgment on the BLNR’s June 19,
 2009 Decision, inasmuch as the Amended Decision became the
 ultimate agency decision in effect regarding the shoreline
 certification on the property. Thus, any appeal from the
 original administrative agency Decision in No. 30573 was mooted
 because the BLNR’s June 19, 2009 Decision is no longer effective. 
Instead, we will review the appeal from the May 21, 2010 Amended
 Decision of the BLNR.
25
 
VIII.
 
Petitioners argue that the ICA failed to consider
 
Paul’s Electric when discussing what deference the court should
 have given to the BLNR. Respectfully, the ICA did err in setting
 forth part of its standard of review. In articulating that
 standard, the ICA stated that “an appellate court’s review of an
 agency decision is ‘qualified by the principle that the agency’s
 decision carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the
 heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the decision is 
25
 However, we observe that the BLNR’s June 19, 2009 Decision will be
 
relevant to the extent necessary to determine the validity of the BLNR’s
Amended Decision, including whether the BLNR complied with the court’s order
on remand. See discussion infra.
 
31
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in its 
consequences.’” Dobbin, 2012 WL 3792024, at *3 (emphases added) 
(quoting Paul v. Dep’t of Transp., 115 Hawai' i 416, 426, 168 P.3d 
546, 555 (2007)). 
Paul’s Electric, however, clarified several aspects of 
the standard for appellate review of administrative agency actions, including the “presumption of validity”, “heavy burden”, and “unjust and unreasonable” language set out by the ICA in its memorandum opinion. See 104 Hawai' i at 417-20, 91 P.3d at 499­
502. This court held in Paul’s Electric, first, that although 
“this court has frequently used the ‘unjust and unreasonable’ language as a proxy for the abuse of discretion standard . . . [,] the ‘unjust and unreasonable’ language has particular applicability only in the context of decisions of the Public Utilities Commission . . . .” 104 Hawai' i at 419, 91 P.3d at 501 
(emphasis added). See also Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai' i 263, 
274-75, 47 P.3d 730, 741-43 (2002) (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting) (observing that the history of the “unjust and unreasonable” language demonstrates its inapplicability to cases not involving the Public Utilities Commission. (citing In re Application of Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Utilities Co., 60 Haw. 166, 179, 590 P.2d 524, 535 (1978))). Since this case does not involve the Public Utilities Commission, the “unjust and unreasonable” language is not applicable here. Second, Paul’s Electric held, with respect to the phrase, “the agency’s decision 
32
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the heavy 
burden of making a convincing showing[,]” that “[a]gency determinations, even if made within the agency’s sphere of expertise, are not presumptively valid[.]” Id. (emphases added); 
see also Nakamura, 98 Hawai' i at 273, 47 P.3d at 740 (Acoba, J., 
concurring dissenting) (“Presuming the validity of the [agency’s] decision as to credibility and weight, or because of its ‘expertise,’ undermines the clearly erroneous rule imposed by [HRS § 91-14(g)(5)].”). Thus, the language regarding the presumptive validity of an agency determination is not applicable in the instant case either. Therefore, in light of this court’s holding in Paul’s Electric, the ICA and Respondents erred when they articulated that standard of review. 
Notwithstanding that error, the ICA correctly 
articulated the “clearly erroneous” standard with respect to the court’s findings, see Hawaii Teamsters, 110 Hawai' i at 265, 132 
P.3d at 374, and de novo review with respect to the court’s conclusions of law, id.; see also Lanai Co. v. Land Use Comm’n, 105 Hawai' i 296, 307, 97 P.3d 372, 383 (2004) (“The courts may 
freely review an agency’s conclusions of law.”) (brackets, internal quotation marks, and citation omitted). Accordingly, we will review the court’s findings of fact under the “clearly erroneous” standard and its conclusions of law under the de novo standard, without any particularized presumption of validity or need to consider whether the agency’s decision was “unjust and 
33
         
 
            
           
           
          
             
           
            
             
               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
unreasonable.” See Paul’s Electric, 104 Hawai' i at 418-20, 91 
P.3d at 499-502. 
IX.
 
Petitioners’ first question presented also appears to 
challenge the ICA’s conclusion that “[t]he [] court erred in 
substituting its judgment for [the] BLNR.” Dobbin, 2012 WL 
3792024, at *5 (emphasis added). It is well-established that when a circuit court reviews an agency determination under HRS § 91-14, that court acts as an appellate court. Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(f), a review of an agency decision “shall be conducted by the appropriate court . . . and shall be confined to the record.” Under HRS § 91-14(g), findings of fact are reviewable as to whether an agency’s decision is clearly erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record. Morimoto v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res., 107 Hawai' i 296, 
302, 113 P.3d 172, 178 (2005). 
Respectfully, the court went beyond determining whether
 
particular conflicting findings were clearly erroneous, and
 
instead made its own factual findings on appeal from the BLNR’s
 
Amended Decision.
26 The court did not err in stating its
 
26
 In its Opening Brief to the ICA, the BLNR argues that the court
 
erred in considering the evidence attached by Petitioners to their brief to
the court on appeal. The BLNR states that, “[a]lthough the declarations
appear to be the same declarations that were submitted in [Petitioners’]
briefs before the [BLNR], no statement to that effect was contained in any of
the [Petitioners’] briefs submitted to the [] court.” The appendix material
provided by the Petitioners was identical to that in the record on appeal,
however, and thus, although the court failed to cite to the record and instead
cited to the appendices to the briefs, any error on the part of the court was
harmless.
 
34
         
       
            
      
     
       
        
      
       
      
      
   
     
       
        
  
     
        
        
         
          
         
    
    
         
        
         
       
       
       
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
conclusions, however, as those adhered to the standards for
 
appellate review as set forth above. For example, unlike the
 court’s findings, which are designated in its decision as
 “Findings of Fact,”
27 the court’s conclusions state that
 
particular findings from the BLNR’s Amended Decision were
 “clearly erroneous.” However, as discussed infra, the court was
 correct in holding that certain findings in the BLNR’s Amended
 
27
 The court articulated these factual determinations in the
 
following findings in its February 16, 2011 decision on the second appeal:
 
32. Subsequent to the planting of the naupaka
and beach heliotrope trees, [Petitioners] also
observed and photographed irrigation lines on Lot 12,
which were used to water the newly planted vegetation.
[]
 
33. The vegetation planted on Lot 12 during
December, 2003, and January and February, 2004 has
been artificially induced by human intervention and
does not represent evidence of the shoreline.
 
. . . .
 
36. The beach fronting [the property] is
currently covered with salt tolerant naupaka and beach
heliotrope trees planted by the prior owner to create
an artificial shoreline.
 
39. The naupaka and beach heliotropes planted
on [the property] act as a barrier that prevents
and/or hinders the observation of the true debris line
that evidences the “upper reaches of the wash of the
waves at high tide during the season of the year in
which the highest wash of the waves occurs.”
 
40. The evidence submitted by the
[Petitioners], including the photographs, clearly
shows that the “upper reaches of the wash of the
waves, other than storm and seismic waves, at high
tide during the season of the year in which the
highest wash of the waves occurs” reaches further
 
mauka onto [the property] than the BLNR’s “current”
 location of the shoreline at the “dune crest.”
 
(Emphases added.)
 
35
         
        
      
       
       
         
        
       
        
       
 
          
                  
             
           
             
              
          
           
             
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Decision were clearly erroneous.28
 
X.
 
To reiterate, HRS § 205A-42(a) states that:
 
The [BLNR] shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91
prescribing procedures for determining a shoreline and
appeals of shoreline determinations that are consistent with
subsection (b); provided that no determination of a
shoreline shall be valid for a period longer than twelve
months, except when the shoreline is fixed by artificial
structures that have been approved by appropriate government
agencies and for which engineering drawings exist to locate
the interface between the shoreline and the structure.
 
(Emphasis added.) The rules adopted by the BLNR are also subject
 
to the definition of “shoreline” in HRS § 205A-1. The
 regulations promulgated by the BLNR as to shoreline
 certifications can be found at HAR chapter 13, subchapter 222. 
In deference to the statutory definition, HRS § 13-222-2 defines
 “shoreline” the same as HRS § 205A-1 does. A “‘[s]horeline
 certification’” is defined as “a signed statement by the
 chairperson of the [BLNR] that the shoreline is as located and
 shown on the map as of a certain date.” HRS § 13-222-2. 
While HRS § 205A-42 limits the validity of a shoreline
 
certification to one year, a particular certification may have
 consequences lasting beyond one year, because the purpose of a
 shoreline determination is “to standardize the application
 
28
 In the court’s conclusion 1, it indicated that the BLNR’s findings
 
27, 34, 35, 36, 38, 40, 41, 46, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 60, 66, 68,
69, 70, 72, and 73 in the BLNR’s Amended Decision were “clearly erroneous in
view of the reliable, probative and substantial evidence on the whole record.
The court also stated, at conclusion 2, that the BLNR’s conclusions 4, 9, 10,
and 11 were “in violation of HRS § 205A-1, in excess of the BLNR’s statutory
authority or jurisdiction, affected by other errors of law, and clearly
erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and substantial evidence on the
whole record.” Some, but not all, of the findings that the court indicated
were clearly erroneous are addressed infra.
 
36
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
procedure for shoreline certifications for purposes of
 
implementing the shoreline setback law and other related laws.” 
HAR § 13-222-1 (emphasis added). As related, “shoreline setback
 lines” are established running parallel to the “shoreline[,]” as
 certified by the BLNR. See HRS § 205A-43(a) (1993) (“Setbacks
 
along shorelines are established of not less than twenty feet and
 not more than forty feet inland from the shoreline.”). The
 “shoreline setback lines”, in turn, dictate where certain
 structures can be built in relation to the seashore. See HRS §
 
205A-44 (stating that “[e]xcept as provided in this section,
 structures are prohibited in the shoreline area without a
 variance pursuant to this part.”). Thus, if the shoreline
 setback line is dependent upon the shoreline certification, then
 structures may or may not be built in a particular area depending
 on where that certification is located. Such structures would
 presumably be in existence for more than one year. Hence, the 
shoreline determination can be a significant designation,
 resulting in ramifications for more than just one year.
 
Moreover, the location of a “shoreline” can be relevant 
to the well-established public right of access to Hawai' i’s 
shorelines. See HRS § 115-4 (1993) (providing for the right of 
transit along the shorelines). HRS § 115-5(a) (1993) states that “[t]he right of transit shall exist seaward of the shoreline and this area shall be defined as a beach transit corridor. For 
purposes of this section, ‘shoreline’ shall have the same meaning as in section 205A-1.” (emphasis added). The right of the public 
37
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to access a beach transit corridor is not at issue in this case. 
However, inasmuch as the definition of “shoreline” is identical
 for purposes of both statutes, an agency’s interpretation of that
 definition in shoreline certification cases may ultimately impact
 the ability of the public to access certain areas along the sea. 
XI.
 
As explained infra, it is axiomatic that the “long-
standing public use of Hawaii’s beaches . . . has ripened into a
 customary right”, and that accordingly, “public policy . . .
 favors extending public use and ownership to as much of Hawaii’s
 shoreline as is reasonably possible.” Sotomura, 55 haw. at 182,
 
517 P.2d at 61-62. The decisions of this court regarding the
 location of the shoreline, of which Diamond I is the latest,
 reflect these principles. Correspondingly, we turn to such
 propositions for guidance in evaluating the instant case.
 
In 1968, this court issued Ashford, an opinion by Chief
 
Justice Richardson, which set forth many of the foundations
 underlying future shoreline determinations. Ashford considered
 
the location of a property that was described in the royal
 patents as running “ma ke kai,” or “along the sea”. 50 Haw. at
 314, 440 P.2d at 77. The appellee contended that the phrase
 described the boundary represented “by the intersection of the
 shore and the horizontal plane of mean high water based on
 publications of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey.” Id. at 77,
 
440 P.2d at 314-15. This court disagreed, instead holding that
 
38
         
          
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“me kai kai” was “along the upper reaches of the wash of the
 
waves, usually evidenced by the edge of vegetation or by the line
 of debris left by the wash of waves[.]” 50 Haw. at 315, 440 P.2d
 at 77. Ashford also held that the testimony of “[t]wo
 
29
 kama'aina[ ] witnesses, living in the area of appellees’ land,”
was relevant to determining the shoreline property boundary. Id. 
at 316, 440 P.2d at 77-78. The shoreline boundary designation stated in Ashford as “the upper reaches of the wash of the waves,” was later codified in HRS chapter 205A. 1975 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 176, § 1 at 386. 
In 1973, in Sotomura, another opinion by Chief Justice
 
Richardson, the boundaries of a property were again at issue. 55
 Haw. at 178. 517 P.2d at 59. A county surveyor located the
 seaward boundary “between the private upland and public beach” at
 “the upper reaches of the wash of the waves”, which he determined
 was along the debris line, in accordance with Ashford. Id. at
 
180, 517 P.2d at 61. The land court agreed. Id. 
Importantly, Sotomura stated that “[t]he Ashford
 
decision was a judicial recognition of long-standing public use
 of Hawaii’s beaches to an easily recognizable boundary that has
 ripened into a customary right.” Id. at 181-82, 517 P.2d at 61
 
(citation omitted). It further established that “[p]ublic
 policy, as interpreted by this court, favors extending to public
 
“Kama'aina” can be defined as “[n]ative-born, one born in a place, 
host; native plant; acquainted, familiar.” Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian 
Dictionary at 124. 
39
 29         
          
         
      
         
     
       
 
   
         
         
         
     
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
use and ownership as much of Hawaii’s shoreline as is reasonably
 
possible.” 55 Haw. at 181, 517 P.2d at 61-62 (emphasis added). 
In accordance with these principles, then, Sotomura held as a
 matter of law that “where the wash of the waves is marked by both
 a debris line and a vegetation line lying further mauka[,] the
 presumption is that the upper reaches of the wash of the waves
 over the course of a year lies along the line marking the edge of
 the vegetation growth.” Id. at 182, 517 P.2d at 62 (emphases
 
added).
 
This line of cases was extended by Diamond I, which 
further clarified the definition of “shoreline,” first set forth in Ashford and currently defined in HRS § 205A-1 and HAR § 13­222-2, with respect to shoreline determinations made pursuant to HRS § 205A-42. 112 Hawai' i at 174, 145 P.3d at 718. The 
shoreline certification at issue in Diamond I was for another property in the same subdivision as the property in the instant case. Id. at 164, 145 P.3d at 707. After a 2002 survey and 
shoreline determination by the BLNR, the plaintiffs in Diamond I appealed, and the BLNR entered its “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order” stating, inter alia, as follows: 
63. Naupaka is an ideal indicator of the upper wash of
the waves because of its salt tolerance and ability to
withstand occasional salt water inundation , such as
may be found in storm or other unusually high wave
conditions, while not surviving if constantly
inundated or subjected to ripping or undermining by
wave action.
 . . . .
 78. The practice of the State Surveyor is to use the
line of vegetation where present, and not the line of
debris, as evidence of the upper wash of the waves,
due to the [sic] greater stability.
 . . . .
 
40
         
        
          
         
     
   
        
        
       
         
        
      
      
        
       
      
      
        
      
     
           
               ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11. The edge of the vegetation growth is the best
evidence of the shoreline in this case . . . as
 
against a debris line which may change from week to
week or from day to day.
 . . . .
 18. The . . . field survey was correct because,
among other things: (1) the age of the vegetation
around the stakes indicated that it was naturally
rooted and growing; (2) there was no evidence that the
vegetation was being artificially maintained . . . [.]
 
Id. at 166-67, 145 P.3d at 709-10 (emphases added). The
 
contested shoreline certification then expired, a new application
 was filed in 2003, and the BLNR certified the shoreline at the
 same location. Id. at 167, 145 P.3d at 710. The plaintiffs
 
appealed this proposed certification, and the BLNR filed an Order
 Denying Appeal, that stated, in relevant part,
 
Stable vegetation are plants that, without continued
human intervention, are well-established and would not
be uprooted, broken off, or unable to survive the
occasional wash or run-up of waves .
The  fact  that  at  one  time  the  vegetation  here
was  planted  by  human  hands  does  not  nullify  the  use  of
the  stable  vegetation  line  to  determine  the  location
of the shoreline for certification purposes.
Vegetation that, even though originally induced, is
able to survive through the seasons over several years
without human intervention provides a good indication
of the location of the shoreline .
 
Id. (emphases added).
 
In support of its actions, the BLNR had argued that
 
Sotomura indicated that the vegetation line was the more stable
 
indicator of the shoreline and thus should be prioritized in all
 cases when making shoreline determinations. Id. at 169, 145 P.3d
 
712. Diamond I disagreed, holding instead that as a matter of
 
statutory interpretation, the plain language of HRS § 205A-1
30
 
30
 The last clause in the definition of “shoreline” was at issue in
 
Diamond. 112 Hawai 'i at 171, 145 P.3d at 714. To reiterate, HRS § 205A-1 
states:
 
(continued...)
 
41
         
 
 
 
         
        
         
        
         
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
required that the shoreline should be “certified at the highest
 
reach of the highest wash of the waves[,]” whether that was
 indicated by the debris line or the vegetation line. Id. at 173,
 
145 P.3d at 716 (emphasis added). It also held that this
 interpretation was consistent with Sotomura, inasmuch as the
 
statement in Sotomura that the vegetation line is a “more
 permanent monument,” supported the Sotomura court’s decision to
 use the vegetation line because it was the furthest mauka. Id.
 
at 175, 145 P.3d at 718. 
Thus, Diamond I concluded that Sotomura does not
 
indicate that the vegetation line will always prevail over the
 
debris line. Id. Instead, the court in Diamond held that “the
 
presumption is that the upper reaches of the wash of the waves
 over the course of a year lies along the line marking the edge of
 the vegetation growth,” if that vegetation line is further mauka
 than the debris line. Id. at 174, 145 P.3d at 717.
 
Diamond I also considered the type of “vegetation
 
growth” that can constitute a “vegetation line” for purposes of
 evidencing the shoreline. Id. at 175, 145 P.3d at 718. The
 
vegetation at issue in Diamond I was naupaka, the same type of
 
30(...continued)
 
“Shoreline” means the upper reaches of the wash of the
waves, other than storm and seismic waves, at high
tide during the season of the year in which the
highest wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by
the edge of vegetation growth, or the upper limit of
debris left by the wash of the waves .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
42
         
      
      
       
    
    
      
       
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
vegetation at issue in the instant case. Id. at 166, 145 P.3d at
 
709. “Vegetation line” was defined in HAR § 13-222-2, as “‘any
 
plant, tree, shrub, grass or groups, clusters, or patches of the
 
same, naturally rooted and growing.’” Id. (emphasis in
 
original). In connection with whether the BLNR was correct in
 deciding that artificially induced naupaka could constitute a
 “vegetation line,” this court noted that “‘the agency’s decision
 must be consistent with the legislative purpose[]’” of HRS
 Chapter 205A. Id. (quoting Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 216,
 
685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984)). 
Diamond I then reviewed the objectives and policies of
 
HRS chapter 205A, including “to ‘[p]rotect beaches for public use
 and recreation[,]’” id. (brackets in original) (quoting HRS §
 205A-2(b)(9)) and to:
 
“(A) Locate new structures inland from the shoreline
 
setback to conserve open space, minimize interference
with natural shoreline processes, and minimize loss of
improvements due to erosion;
 
(B) Prohibit construction of private, erosion
protection structures seaward of the shoreline, except
when they result in improved aesthetic and engineering
solutions to erosion at the sites and do not interfere
 with existing recreational and waterline
activities[.]”
 
Id. (brackets in original) (quoting HRS § 205A-2(c)(9)). 
Diamond I concluded that “[t]he utilization of
 
artificially planted vegetation in determining the certified
 
shoreline encourages private land owners to plant and promote
 salt tolerant vegetation to extend their land further makai[.]” 
Thus, Diamond I held, “[m]erely because artificially planted
 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
vegetation survives more than one year does not deem it
 
‘naturally rooted and growing’ such that it can be utilized to
 determine the shoreline.” Id. (emphasis added). Diamond I
 
overturned the BLNR’s order denying appeal in that case, noting
 that the order had “explicitly rejected the placement of the
 shoreline at the highest wash of the waves during high season[,]”
 and instead located the shoreline at the vegetation line,
 notwithstanding the possibility that a debris line may have been
 more representative of the highest wash of the waves, and the
 fact that the vegetation had been planted and irrigated. Id. at
 
176, 145 P.3d at 719.
 
XII.
 
In Petitioners’ second question, they challenge the 
merits of the BLNR’s shoreline determination decision. As to this question, we conclude that the BLNR’s ultimate shoreline determination is invalid because the agency made errors of fact and errors of law in its Amended Decision. The BLNR’s errors of law are discussed first. Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable for whether they are in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; are in excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; or are affected by other error of law. See Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa 
Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai' i 217, 229, 953 P.2d 1315, 
1327 (1998) (citing HRS § 91-14(g)). 
44
         
         
            
          
           
           
               
          
                 
       
           
               
          
             
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
The BLNR’s first error of law was with respect to its
 
use of historical evidence. We conclude that the BLNR must
 
consider historical evidence in making its shoreline
 determination. The BLNR apparently concedes this point, but in
 its first decision did not take into consideration any evidence
 beyond the one year’s wash of the waves.
31
 
The BLNR failed to properly follow the court’s
 
instruction on remand that HRS § 205A-1 does not limit the
 agency’s analysis of the upper reaches of the wash of the waves
 “for only the ‘current’ season . . . .”
32 As noted, in its April
 
6, 2010 decision on the first appeal, the court stated that
 “[t]he BLNR’s interpretation of HRS § 205A-1, [] that only the
 ‘current’ year’s evidence of the upper reaches of the wash of the
 waves should be considered in determining the shoreline . . .
 conflicts with and/or contradicts the purpose and intent of HRS §
 
31 Although we determined that the appeal from the BLNR’s first
 
decision is moot, as observed supra, we may consider the BLNR’s first decision
for purposes of determining the validity of the BLNR’s Amended Decision.
 
32 In COL No. 5 of the BLNR’s Amended Decision, it quotes the
 
relevant statute and regulation to define “shoreline” as: “[T]he upper wash of
 
the waves , other than storm and seismic waves . . . .” (Emphasis added.) The
 
correct definition, in relevant part is that “‘[s]horeline’ means the upper
reaches of the wash of the waves , other than storm and seismic waves . . . .”
HRS § 206A-1; HAR § 13-222-2 (emphasis added).
It is worth noting that the word “reaches” in this context would
 
mean “to extend to” or “to get up to or as far as”. Merriam Webster’s
 
Collegiate Dictionary 972 (10th ed. 1993). Moreover, “reaches”, in plural,
suggests more than one wash of the waves, and thereby is consistent with the
requirement, discussed infra, that the agency consider historical evidence of
the wash of the waves.
 
45
         
       
     
         
         
      
         
         
        
        
       
          
         
          
           
          
         
      
        
          
    
     
        
          
          
         
        
       
          
              
            
            
             
           
             
          
          
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
205A-1 [].”33 At the oral argument on the second appeal to the
 
court, the court discussed with the BLNR’s attorney whether the
 
agency had in fact taken into account historical evidence of the
 upper reaches of the wash of the waves.
 
THE COURT: Okay. So you would agree with
 
[Petitioners’ attorney] then that the certification
itself lasts for one year, however, the State is not
restricted to looking at data for that one year period
only?
 
[Counsel  for  BLNR]: Oh,  yeah  -­
THE  C
OURT: You  would  agree  with  him?
[C
ounsel for BLNR]: Yeah, I agree that we’re
not restricted to looking at only that one year period
and we have not restricted the, you know, the evidence
that they’ve considered to a one year period, because
I think even in the surveyor’s report there’s a
statement that says, you know, the past historical
data used to -- to indicate the change in condition or
the conditions of the shoreline, you know, so, it may
not be used to say, well, the shoreline, you know, was
here five years ago so it should be here now. But
 it’s used to show how the shoreline is moving in that
area and what the trends in that area are.
 
THE COURT: Then given that position, I would
assume then that the State would consider 12 years’
worth of people who live in the area and pictures that
they’ve taken of the shoreline.
[Counsel for BLNR]: They -- we’re not
 
disagreeing that that kind of evidence is relevant and
that it should be looked at. We don’t disagree with
 that. I think the problem is that the evidence that
was presented in this particular case was not -- was
 not probative because it didn’t -- it didn’t contain,
 
I guess enough -- it wasn’t substantial enough.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Contrary to what counsel suggested in oral argument,
 
the BLNR did not fully consider historical evidence when it made
 
33
 As indicated, the BLNR argued before the court on both appeals,
 
and to the ICA, that its interpretation of HRS § 205A-1 required that only the
“current year’s” evidence of the highest wash of the waves be taken into
account in making a shoreline determination. However, in its Response to this
court, the BLNR does not argue its earlier interpretation of HRS § 205A-1, but
rather states that “[t]he ICA properly determined that the ‘BLNR did not
 restrict its analysis of the upper reaches of the waves to the current year,
but rather took into evaluation all relevant factors present on the
[p]roperty.’” (Quoting Dobbin, 2012 WL 3792024, at *5) (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted).
 
46
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the findings in its Amended Decision. Although it removed the
 
findings from its initial decision discussing only the “current
 year’s” wash of the waves, the BLNR’s discussion of historical
 evidence in its Amended Decision appears to be a post hoc
 justification of its earlier decision. 
In its first decision, the BLNR adopted the State
 
Surveyor’s recommendation in full. In that decision, the BLNR
 stated that it did not consider historical evidence other than
 the current year’s wash of the waves. In fact, the BLNR stated
 in its first decision that “given the variable and temporary
 nature of shorelines, [Petitioners’] insistence on solely
 utilizing historical evidence in the determination of a shoreline
 may result in inaccurately locating the upper reaches of the wash
 of the waves in a given year.” (Emphasis added.) 
However, in its Amended Decision, the BLNR stated that
 
the State Surveyor’s initial recommendation from his May 28, 2008
 letter was “based, at least in part, on the Galloway
 [A]pplication . . . [,]” despite the fact that the Galloway
 Application was not mentioned at all in the BLNR’s first
 decision. If, in fact, the State Surveyor had considered the
 Galloway Application as historical evidence, his recommendation,
 which the BLNR purportedly adopted in its first decision as the
 appropriate shoreline location, would be based on factors that
 were inconsistent with the approach to shoreline certification
 that the BLNR articulated in its first decision. In other words,
 
47
         
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in its first decision, the BLNR stated that only the current
 
year’s evidence could be considered in making shoreline
 determinations, but in its Amended Decision, it maintained that
 historical evidence had in fact been considered in its first
 decision setting forth the proposed shoreline. 
The Amended Decision also improperly limited its
 
consideration of “historical evidence” to the past two winters.
 
With respect to the evidence of the Galloway Application, it
 
stated that, “[t]he State Surveyor and DLNR staff also noted that
 
there was no evidence that the wash of the waves had extended
 
that far mauka in the past two winters, especially not during the
 immediately preceding winter season.” (Emphasis added.) 
However, the court’s decision on the first appeal stated several
 times that Petitioners had observed the shoreline for the past
 eight years. This statement from the court’s findings, combined
 with the court’s mandate that the BLNR consider more than just
 the “current year’s” evidence of the highest wash of the waves,
 indicates that the court instructed the BLNR to consider all
 historical evidence, rather than just the historical evidence
 that the BLNR felt was appropriate. Thus, where there was
 evidence of prior years’ “wash of the waves,” the agency must
 consider the evidence from those years when making the shoreline
 determination. 
This comports not only with the instructions of the
 
court on remand, but also with this court’s decision in Ashford,
 
48
         
         
       
        
      
     
      
       
       
      
       
          
      
       
  
       
      
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which held that “reputation evidence by kama' aina witnesses” must 
be allowed in determining the “public and private boundary 
dividing private land and public beaches.” Ashford, 50 Haw. at 
317, 145 P.3d at 718. Thus, the BLNR was wrong when it used only the historical evidence from the two preceding winter seasons to determine the “highest wash of the waves,” rather than evaluating historical evidence of the past eight years for which Petitioners provided testimony of their observations. HRS § 205A-1. We therefore also expressly reject Dobbin and Wagner’s contention that “the ultimate determination of the upper reaches of the wash of the waves at high tide . . . is [solely] one for experts and those qualified under the law.” This is wrong as a matter of law. 
B.
 
Second, in the instant case, the BLNR’s Amended
 
Decision posits a “multi-variable” approach to shoreline
 certifications, as set forth in the following findings:
 
24. It is the current practice of the DLNR and the
State Surveyor to use a multi-variable approach to
determining the location of the upper wash of the
waves for shoreline certification purposes. The
 
multi-variable approach takes into consideration all
pertinent and appropriate evidentiary factors in a
shoreline setting , based on the shoreline type (sand
beach, perched beach, cliff, rocky shoreline, etc., or
a combination thereof), location (north-, south-,
east-, or west-facing shore), and exposure to large
waves (protected within a cover or a bay or by rock
outcroppings or reefs, or located within the
protective shadow of other islands, versus exposed to
the open ocean).
 
25. Some of the evidential variables used by the
DLNR and State Surveyor include, without limitation,
debris lines, vegetation lines, wet lines, artificial
 
49
         
     
   
  
       
        
      
        
        
         
        
      
      
       
      
       
    
       
         
       
      
       
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
structures, dune crests, erosion scarps, salt
deposits, discoloration, and saltwater-dependent
biota.
 
26. The DLNR and State Surveyor also consider other
features or facts unique to each shoreline and makes
appropriate adjustments to the interpretation of the
evidence as those features or facts are determined by
the DLNR and State Surveyor to affect the natural
movement of the wash of the waves within the subject
shoreline area. Such features and facts include the
 
presence and effect of artificially induced vegetation
or artificially created topographic anomalies that are
not representative of the overall trends of the
natural shoreline in the subject shoreline area .
 
27. The DLNR and State Surveyor also incorporate in
their shoreline determination, any pertinent
information about the shoreline that is presented by
the owner of the subject property and any other member
of the public that has personal knowledge and
familiarity with the shoreline conditions of the
subject property during high surf conditions in the
season of high surf.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
This multi-variable approach is not described in the
 
statute or in the relevant case law. The approach the BLNR
 
should have followed is set out in HRS § 205A-1, defining
 shoreline, and this court’s jurisprudence. See Diamond I, 112
 
Hawai'i at 172-73, 145 P.3d 715-16 (holding that where the 
shoreline is marked by both a vegetation line and a debris line,
the line further mauka is used to locate the shoreline);
  
Sotomura, 55 Haw. at 181-82, 517 P.2d at 61-62 (locating a ‘high
 water mark’ property boundary at the vegetation line where that
 line was further mauka); Ashford, 50 Haw. at 316, 440 P.2d at 78
 (holding that the location of the boundary dividing private land
 from public beaches “was along the upper reaches of the waves as
 represented by the edge of vegetation or the line of debris.”). 
50
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Any factors identified by the BLNR must be consistent with our 
case law, and require that the shoreline be located at the debris line or vegetation line, whichever is furthest mauka. Diamond I, 112 Hawai' i at 172, 145 P.3d at 715. Any approach 
undertaken by the BLNR must be executed in accordance with this basic precept. See id. at 169, 145 P.3d at 712 (holding that 
“‘the Ashford decision was a judicial recognition of the long-standing public use of Hawai' i’s beaches to an easily 
recognizable boundary that has ripened into a customary right[,]” and accordingly, the boundary markers for the shoreline must be “‘easily recognizable’” and “‘known to the people living thereon or in the neighborhood.’”) (emphasis in original) (quoting Sotomura, 55 Haw. at 181-82, 517 P.2d at 61)). 
C.
 1.
 
Third, pursuant to Diamond I, “vegetation growth” does 
not include salt-tolerant plants planted on the property for the purpose of shoreline demarcation, nor the natural expansion of such growth. 112 Hawai' i at 175, 145 P.3d at 718. Although in 
this case there is a dispute over the extent to which the plants were artificially induced, it is undisputed that salt-tolerant plants were in evidence on the property. However, the BLNR’s Amended Decision does not indicate how it considered the presence of these salt-tolerant plants in making its decision. On remand, the BLNR must comply with Diamond I’s holding that does not allow 
51
         
          
            
           
          
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the use of salt-tolerant vegetation as an indication of the
 
“vegetation line.” Id. 
2.
 
Relatedly, there is also no indication in the Amended
 
Decision of whether the BLNR took artificial barriers into
 consideration. In Diamond I, this court instructed that one of
 the objectives of HRS chapter 205A was to “‘[p]rohibit
 construction of private erosion-protection structures seaward of
 the shoreline, except when they result in improved aesthetic and
 engineering solutions to erosion at the sites and do not
 interfere with existing recreational and waterline activities.’” 
Id. (quoting HRS § 205A-2(c)(9)). Diamond I barred the use of
 
artificially induced plants as an indication of the shoreline,
 because the use of such a false vegetation line in making a
 shoreline determination would allow landowners to effectively
 erect an artificial “barrier” extending their land further makai. 
Id. This would be contrary to the objectives behind HRS chapter
 
205A. Yet, the BLNR’s Amended Decision is bereft of any
 indication of how the policies of HRS § 205A-2(c)(9)
34 have been
 
enforced, reflecting a disregard of the standards set forth in
 Diamond I, Sotomura, and Ashford.
 
34
 HRS § 205A-2 (Supp. 2001) sets forth the objectives and policies
 
for the Coastal Zone Management Program. Among these is HRS § 205A­
2(c)(9)(D), which states that in connection with beach protection, it is a
policy to “[p]rohibit private property owners from creating a public nuisance
by inducing or cultivating the private property owner’s vegetation in a beach
transit corridor.”
 
52
         
        
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HAR § 13-222-2 defines “vegetation growth” as “any
 
plant, tree, shrub, grass or groups, clusters, or patches of the
 
same, naturally rooted and growing.” (Emphasis added.) The
 BLNR’s decision did not take this definition, specifically the
 “naturally rooted and growing” portion, into consideration when
 it decided the naupaka and other plants could be used as an
 indicator of the shoreline. Both sides submitted evidence on
 this issue, and at FOF No. 69, the BLNR concluded that “Appellees
 Dobbin and Wagner’s Opening Brief [sic] [to the BLNR] refuted the
 assertions that the vegetation growing along the shoreline was
 planted and ‘induced’ with the aid of irrigation.” 
But, there was no support for this finding. The BLNR
 
cited to Dobbin and Wagner’s Answering Brief, which stated only
 that the sprinklers located on the property were not “aimed
 towards nor intended to irrigate the naturally growing shoreline
 vegetation.”
35 However, in order to determine whether the
 
vegetation was “naturally rooted and growing” in accordance with
 the HAR § 13-222-2 definition, the BLNR must determine that the
 shoreline vegetation was actually “naturally growing”, which
 requires more than a conclusion that the sprinklers were not
 “aimed at or intended to irrigate” the vegetation. If the
 sprinklers’ action actually resulted in watering the vegetation
 as a result of the wind or other natural factors, then it is of 
35
 There was also some inconsistency between the affidavits provided
 
by Respondents regarding the location of the sprinklers.
 
53
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
no import whether the sprinklers were not “intended to irrigate”
 
the vegetation.
 
3.
 
Moreover, in this case, the BLNR Amended Decision 
states only that the State Surveyor and DLNR considered “the presence and effect of artificially induced vegetation or artificially created topographic anomalies[.]” It is not evident from the decision how the presence of potentially artificial barriers affected the BLNR’s determination of the “highest wash of the waves.” HRS § 205A-1. See Kilauea Neighborhood Ass’n v. 
Land Use Comm’n., 7 Haw. App. 227, 230, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988) (“An agency’s findings must be sufficient to allow the reviewing court to track the steps by which the agency reached its decision.”); In re Water Use Permit Applications, 105 Hawai' i 
1, 27, 93 P.3d 643, 669 (2004) (Acoba, J., concurring) (“The purpose behind findings is to assure reasoned decision making by the agency and enable judicial review of agency decisions.” (internal quotation marks and citations omitted)). 
Additionally, the BLNR’s Amended Decision locates the 
shoreline at “the makai edge of the hedge.” According to the BLNR’s finding 36(e), this is the area where naupaka and beach heliotrope are located, along with debris. Diamond I mandates 
that, as between the debris and the vegetation line, the shoreline must be located at the line that is further mauka. 112 Hawai'i at 174-75, 145 P.3d at 717-18. The Amended Decision 
54
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
states at finding 61 that, “[Petitioners] argued that the use of
 
naupaka or other salt tolerant plants to create an artificial
 shoreline prevents or hinders the observation of the true
 evidence of the debris line created by the upper wash of the
 winter waves.” Petitioner Diamond’s Declaration also states that
 “[a]t the site visit on April 18, 2008, I pointed out the current
 condition of the naupaka as obvious evidence that the highest
 wash of waves had in fact washed through and into the planted
 vegetation.” 
However, in its Amended Decision, the BLNR seemingly
 
did not take into account whether the debris line was located at
 the same place as the vegetation line because the debris line
 was, as Petitioners suggest, being hindered by the presence of
 salt-tolerant vegetation. Although the Amended Decision suggests
 that debris is located in the vegetation, it included no findings
 as to whether the vegetation line or the debris line is located
 further mauka. It would be contrary to Diamond, the policy
 articulated in Sotomura, and the legislative purpose behind HRS
 chapter 205A, as noted supra, to locate the shoreline where salt-
tolerant plants had been grown and had prevented a debris line
 from forming that was indicative of the true “highest wash of the
 waves.” 
D.
 
Fourth, the BLNR apparently disregarded the Wichman
 
testimony submitted by Petitioners, on the basis that first, it
 
55
         
  
         
        
         
      
          
        
          
        
  
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“was not in the form of an affidavit or declaration,” second, it
 
“was not attested to by anyone nor was any context for the
 document provided by [Petitioners],” and third, that “[i]t is not
 clear from the document or [Petitioners’] Opening Brief [to the
 BLNR] whether the person who allegedly authored the document is
 an expert or what his expertise might be, if any.” The BLNR’s
 disregard for this testimony is manifestly contrary to HRS
 chapter 91.
 
A shoreline determination is a contested case hearing. 
See Diamond I, 112 Hawai' i at 165, 145 P.3d at 708. With respect 
to evidence adduced in contested case hearings, HRS § 91-10 (Supp. 2003) provides in relevant part that: 
In contested cases:
 
36
(1) Except as provided in section 91-8.5[ ], any oral or
documentary evidence may be received, but every agency shall
as a matter of policy provide for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence and
no sanction shall be imposed or rule or order be issued
except upon consideration of the whole record or such
portions thereof as may be cited by any party and as
supported by and in accordance with the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence .
 
(Emphases added.) The BLNR made an implicit finding that the
 
Wichman testimony was not reliable, apparently because of the
 format of the document. But it is elemental that contested case
 hearings do not require that evidence presented to the BLNR must
 be in the form of an affidavit or declaration, or “attested to.” 
Instead, under the statute, “any oral or documentary evidence may
 
36
 HRS § 91-8.5 (Supp. 2003) is not relevant to this case.
 
56
         
          
         
             
             
             
           
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
be received” unless such evidence is “irrelevant, immaterial, or
 
unduly repetitious”. HRS § 91-10. There is nothing in the
 record to indicate that the Wichman testimony was “irrelevant,
 immaterial, or unduly repetitious.” The BLNR erred as a matter
 of law in entirely disregarding the testimony.
 
Additionally, the BLNR’s findings of fact with respect 
to Wichman’s testimony are clearly erroneous. The BLNR states that “it is not clear . . . whether the person who allegedly authored the document is an expert or what his expertise might be, if any.” First, it would not necessarily matter whether Wichman was an expert.
37 Pursuant to this court’s decision in 
Ashford, the testimony of kama' aina witness is relevant in 
locating the shoreline, and Wichman stated that “[a]ll [his] life [he] has been an active surfer, diver and fisherman and know[s] [sic] the ocean and beaches here in Ha' ena and Wainiha very 
well.” 
Second, the Wichman testimony states that he has worked
 
for the National Tropical Botanical Garden since 1976, and is the
 director of the Limahuli Garden and Preserve. Under these
 circumstances, the BLNR’s outright dismissal of the Wichman
 
37
 In the BLNR’s first decision, its findings state that “ [w]hile Mr.
 
Wichman’s testimony appears to be presented as expert testimony regarding
vegetation, there is no evidence that he is qualified to testify as an expert
on such features as the ‘highest wash of the waves’ that are determined by
 coastal geology or ocean dynamics.” The BLNR gives no indication of why the
Wichman testimony could no longer be deemed “expert testimony” when it made
 its Amended Decision. Thus, the notion that Wichman’s testimony was not
 “expert” appears to be a post hoc justification to disregard that testimony
altogether.
 
57
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
testimony, because “[i]t is not clear . . . whether the person 
who allegedly authored the document is an expert or what his expertise might be, if any[,]” is not only clearly erroneous, but manifestly wrong as a matter of law. See Ashford, 50 Haw. at 
316, 440 P.2d at 77 (holding that “Hawaii’s land laws are unique in that they are based on ancient tradition, custom, practice, and usage[,]” and therefore, reputation evidence by kama' aina 
witnesses may be used in land disputes). 
XIII.
 
A.
 
The ICA also erred in vacating the court’s decision and
 
affirming the BLNR’s Amended Decision because, as the court
 observed, many of the agency’s findings of fact were clearly
 erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial
 evidence in the whole record. See HRS 91-14(g)(5). A finding of
 
fact is “clearly erroneous” when “‘(1) the record lacks
 substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, or
 (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.’” Del Monte Fresh 
Produce, Inc. v. Int’l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, 112 Hawai' i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006) (quoting In re 
Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 119, 9 P.3d 409, 
431 (2000)). To determine whether evidence is substantial evidence, it must be “credible evidence which is of sufficient 
58
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
 
caution to support a conclusion.” Id. (internal quotation marks
 
and ciatations omitted). 
B.
 
In the instant case, the BLNR made a number of clearly
 
erroneous findings with respect to Petitioners’ declarations and
 the attached photographs. Findings 48 through 56, discussing the
 evidence presented by Petitioners, are incorrect and/or
 inconsistent and thus undermine the final determination by the
 BLNR. First, finding 52 stated that “[the Blair declaration] did
 not contain any information as to the dates when specific
 photographs were taken or who took the photographs.” This is
 clearly erroneous in light of the Blair declaration, which
 stated, inter alia, that “[t]he photograph attached hereto as
 Exhibit ‘E’ was taken on October 19, 2005, and shows Chris L.
 Conger identifying the location of the shoreline as recommended
 by the State Surveyor on October 19, 2005.” (Emphasis added.) 
The BLNR’s finding 51 stated that “it is not possible to
 ascertain from [the Blair declaration] what was the object of the
 specific photographs or what they were purported to portray. 
(Emphasis added.) To the contrary, the Blair declaration stated
 that “the photographs attached hereto as Exhibits ‘G’ through ‘N’
 are true and correct copies, and accurately show the upper
 reaches of the waves . . . on the Dobbin property.”
 
59
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
At finding 48, the BLNR states that “[t]he photographs
 
contained in Exhibits G through N of [Petitioners’] Opening Brief
 
are date stamped, either on the photos or in the captions, with
 dates falling between 2004 and 2008.” (Emphasis added.) But, in
 contradiction of finding 48, at finding 53, the BLNR stated that
 “[w]ithout having made any reference to specific observations as
 to the location of the highest wash of the waves, [Petitioner]
 Blair testified that . . . the shoreline should be located twenty
 feet mauka of the proposed shoreline,” and at finding 56, it
 stated that “[the Blair Declaration] and [the Diamond
 Declaration] do not clearly identify what each photograph is
 purported to depict.” (Emphases added.) These last two
 observations are inaccurate in light of the fact that the
 photographs, some dated, were also attached to the briefs as
 exhibits, and in light of the actual Blair Declaration that
 provided some specifics as to what the photos depict and what
 locations were relevant. Based on these errors in considering
 the points discussed by Petitioners in their declarations, it is
 obvious that “the record lacks substantial evidence” to support
 these findings. The BLNR apparently rejected altogether
 Petitioners’ evidence of the location of the shoreline, thereby
 ignoring substantial historical evidence of the shoreline’s
 location.
 
XIV.
 
Finally, the BLNR’s Amended Decision reflects an abuse
 
60
         
 
     
        
       
         
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of discretion because it arbitrarily and capriciously failed to
 
follow the instructions of the court on remand from its earlier
 decision. Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g)(6), an agency’s exercise of
 discretion is reviewable as to whether it is “[a]rbitary, or
 capricious, or characterized by an abuse of discretion or clearly
 unwarranted exercise of discretion.” See Sullivan
, 87 Hawai' i at 
228, 953 P.2d at 1326. In the instant case, the BLNR failed to
 follow the proper instructions of the court on remand with
 respect to its Amended Decision. 
At oral argument before the court on the second appeal,
 
the following colloquy took place between the court and the
 attorney for the BLNR:
 
[Counsel  for  BLNR]: Exactly.   What  it  was
 
[the  BLNR  was]  taking,  based  on  the  [c]ourt’s,  you
know,  findings  and  the  directions  from  this  [c]ourt,
they  were  taking  a  new  hard  look  at  the  evidence  that
was  actually  presented  in  the  initial  case.
THE  COURT: As  opposed  to  what  kind  of  look  that
was  initially  taken?
[Counsel  for  BLNR]: I  mean,  they  did  take
 
it.   I  mean,  they  did  consider  it.   You  know,  it  was
this  [c]ourt  that  disagreed  with  their
characterization  of  the  evidence,  so  they  looked  at  it
again,  and  -­
THE  COURT: Ms.  Chow,  let  me  just,  I  want  to
make  sure  that  I’m  absolutely  clear  on  this  point.
 
Okay.
 
Upon  remand,  this  [c]ourt  stated  that  the  matter
is  remanded  to  the  BLNR  with  specific  instructions  to
appropriately  consider  and  give  due  weight  to
[Petitioners’]  proposed  evidence  and  to  correctly
apply  applicable  statutes,  case  law  and  Administrative
Rules.
 
You’re  saying  the  consideration  and  the  weight
that  was  given  the  second  go  round  is  the  same  as  it
was  given  the  first  go  round?
[
Counsel for BLNR]: Well, it was -- that
 
could very well be because, you know, the board
believes it gave appropriate weight to the evidence
during the first go round. The evidence didn’t change
between the first decision and the second decision.
 
61
         
     
      
        
   
       
          
         
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
THE COURT: So this [c]ourt’s decision finding
otherwise, and this [c]ourt’s instructions sending the
matter back to the BLNR, really had no significant
effect on the BLNR?
 
[Counsel for BLNR]: They did take a relook ­
-they did relook at all of the evidence and, you
know, to see, you know, was there something there that
was not considered the first time or, you know, how
c
ould they better support their, you know, decision.
How  was  it  -- would  their  decision  be  supported.   And
 
they,  you  know,  made  the  amended  findings  and
decision.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
With respect to its Amended Decision, first, the BLNR
 
did not address the court’s conclusion in its decision on the
 
first appeal that “the current certified shoreline appears to
 incorrectly allow for the manipulation of the shoreline based
 upon artificially induced and enhanced vegetation, not in
 accordance with HRS § 205A-1.” Although the BLNR discussed how
 it weighed Petitioners’ evidence in its findings with respect to
 whether the shoreline was artificially created, it arbitrarily
 failed to indicate how it weighed Respondents Dobbin and Wagner’s
 evidence. 
Instead, in its Amended Decision, the BLNR simply
 
recounted Respondents Dobbin and Wagner’s evidence at findings 69
 through 75. For example, on the issue of whether the sprinkler
 heads were aimed at the shoreline vegetation or toward the mauka
 portion of the property, the BLNR did not explain how it found
 that the Moody Affidavit, stating that “to the best of [Moody’s]
 recollection, all the sprinkler heads on [the line closest to the 
62
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shoreline] were aimed in such a fashion that the spray pattern
 
would be parallel to or away from the shoreline[,]” was more
 persuasive than Petitioner Diamond’s declaration or photographs. 
Instead, finding 72 states only that “Steve Moody, the owner of
 the [] property from 2000 to 2004, admitted to having an
 irrigation system [on] the property, but he testified that the
 system was located several feet away from the edge of the naupaka
 growing along the shoreline and that all of the sprinkler heads
 were aimed so the spray would be parallel to or away from the
 shoreline.”
 
Additionally, the declarations of current and former
 
owners provided by Dobbin and Wagner do not include any testimony
 with respect to where they saw the highest wash of the waves on
 the property. Thus, the only substantial evidence of a
 historical nature, see Ashford, 50 Haw. at 315, 440 P.2d at 77,
 were the years of observations described in the declarations of
 Diamond, Blair, and Robeson, and the record fails in any way to
 controvert Petitioners’ historical evidence. 
XV.
 
Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s August 31, 2012
 
Memorandum Opinion is vacated in part, the court’s March 31, 2011
 decision is vacated in part, the May 21, 2010 Amended Decision of
 the BLNR is vacated, and the case is remanded to the court with 
63
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instructions to remand the case to the BLNR for proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion. 
Harold Bronstein,
for petitioners
Walton D.Y. Hong,
for respondents
Craig Dobbin and
Wagner Engineering
Donna H. Kalama,
Linda L.W. Chow,and Julie H. China,for respondentState of Hawai' i,
Board of Land and Natural Resources /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
64
 