***   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I  
 
---O0O---  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee.  
 
vs. 
 
PETER DAVID, 
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-12-0000109 
                                                              
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0000109; CR. NO. 11- 1-0050) 
 
DECEMBER 2 2, 2017 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Peter David (David) was charged with murder in the 
second degree of Santhony Albert (Albert) and assault in the 
second degree of Torokas Kikku (Kikku).  At trial before the Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-12-0000109
22-DEC-2017
07:59 AM*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
2 
 
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court),1 David 
claimed that he acted in self- defense.  The jury found him 
guilty of the lesser included offenses of manslaughter and 
assault in the third degree. 
We consider only one issue on certiorari review: 
whether the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) gravely erred in 
holding that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by 
allowing the State of Hawaiʻi to present testimony in rebuttal  
that went beyond the limited scope permitted by the trial court 
and introduced evidence of  David’s uncooperative behavior with 
2the police.  
We hold that the State’s rebuttal testimony was 
improper because it exceeded the limited scope of testimony 
permitted by the court, and the introduction of the improper 
rebuttal testimony was not harmless error.  Accordingly, we 
vacate the ICA’s judgment on appeal and the circuit court’s 
judgment of conviction and sentence, and remand for a new trial 
on both offenses.  
                     
1  The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.   
 
2  We do not reach David’s second issue, whether the ICA gravely 
erred in remanding David’s case for resentencing rather than for a new trial 
given the misconduct of the prosecutor during sentencing, because we hold 
that the first error already necessitates  remand for a new trial.  Likewise, 
we also decline to analyze the alleged prosecutorial misconduct during the 
State’s closing argument for plain error as requested in David’s application 
for certiorari.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
3 
 
 II. BACKGROUND 
The undisputed evidence established that on the night 
of January 1, 2011, David  and his cousin, Albert , were involved 
in a fight outside an apartment on Awanei Street in Waipahu that 
ended with David fatally stabbing Albert.  After David stabbed 
Albert, Albert’s aunt, Torokas Kikku (Kikku),  confronted David.  
Kikku sustained minor injuries as a result of the confrontation.  
The primary disputed issues at trial were whether David or 
Albert was the aggressor, and whether David acted in self-
defense. 
A.
 Trial Court Proceedings 
On January 12, 2011, the State filed a complaint in 
the circuit court 
charging David with murder in the second 
degree of Albert, in violation of Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) 
3 4§§ 707-701.5  and 706- 656.  The State also charged David with 
                     
 3  HRS § 707 -701.5 (1993) provides, in relevant part:  
 
(1) . . . a person commits the offense of 
murder in the second degree if the person 
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of 
another person.   
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for 
which the defendant shall be sentenced to 
imprisonment as provided in section 706 -656. 
 
 4  HRS § 706 -656(2) (Supp. 2010) provides, in relevant part:  “ . . . 
persons convicted of second degree murder and attempted second degree murder 
shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with possibility of parole.”  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
4 
 
 assault in the second degree of Kikku, in violation of HRS § 
5707-711(1).   David’s jury  trial began on September 26, 2011. 
1. The State’s Case -in-Chief 
The State called eight witnesses in its case- in-chief, 
including Kikku.  Kikku described  David as the aggressor in the 
confrontation between David and Albert.  According to Kikku, she 
attended a party in Kalihi on January 1, 2011 with her husband  
Erick Sam (Sam), at which both Albert and David were present.  
Kikku testified that she did not drink, but the men (including 
David, Sam, and Albert) were drinking beer and vodka.  
After an 
argument broke out at the party , Albert, Kikku, Sam , and a few 
others left the Kalihi house in Albert’s car and went to Kikku’s 
Awanei Street apartment in Waipahu.  Kikku testified that before 
they left Kalihi, David told Albert to give him  the beer in 
Albert’s car; in response,  Albert offered David one beer.  David 
                     
 5  HRS § 707 -711(1) (Supp. 2010) provides, in relevant parts:  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in  
the second degree if:   
 
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly  
    causes substantial bodily injury to  
    another; 
 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or  
    substantial bodily injury to another;  
 
. . . . 
    
(d) The person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily  
    injury to another with a dangerous instrument . . . .  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
5 
 
 rejected Albert’s offer  and demanded all of the beer.  Kikku 
testified that after Albert offered David the one beer, Kikku, 
Sam, and Albert departed for the Awanei Street apartment.  At 
around 8:00 p.m., Kikku, Sam, Albert , and the others in Albert’s 
car arrived at the Awanei Street apartment.  The men started 
drinking, and about thirty minutes later, David arrived.  Kikku 
testified that she did not invite David into the apartment,  but 
told Sam that David was there.   Sam went outside and told David 
not to come in, but David entered anyway. 
Once inside the apartment, David began drinking beer 
with Albert and Sam.  Some time afterwards, Kikku heard the 
police come to her
 apartment and knock on the door.6  Kikku 
testified that while the police were at the door on the lanai, 
David and Albert were in the parking lot downstairs.  Kikku did 
not know whether the police talked to David and Albert, but 
after the police left, David and Albert came back upstairs.   
When David and Albert came back into the apartment, 
Kikku noticed a s
cratch on David’s nose that was not bleeding 
but looked “fresh.”  In regard  to the scratch on David’s nose, 
David told Albert “how come you do this to me, no man can do 
this to me,” and he looked angry.  Immediately after this 
                     
6  Kikku would later clarify that the police were called to the 
apartment by a neighbor .    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
6 
 
 exchange, David went outside and told Albert to go with him.  
Kikku held Albert’s hand to stop him from going downstairs, and 
told him not to go, but Albert followed David outside.  Within 
the next ten seconds,  Kikku followed Albert out of her apartment 
where she went outside and saw David chase and hit Albert in the 
back of the head.  Kikku did not know whether David had anything 
in his hand when she saw him hit Albert.  
Kikku followed David and Albert, and after turning a 
corner she saw Albert bending over with his torso parallel to 
the ground.  Kikku went over to Albert to help him back to her 
apartment.  She did not realize he was bleeding or hurt at the 
time. 
Kikku tried to walk Albert toward  the apartment, but 
Albert had trouble walking.  Kikku then saw David return with a 
rock in each hand, raised slightly above his shoulders.  Kikku 
ran over to David and pushed him, trying to block him from 
Albert, and David pushed her back with the rocks, causing 
scratching under Kikku’s arm and under her chin.   
Kikku let go of David after he pushed her with the 
rocks.  At that point, she saw David run over to Albert, who was 
now laying face-up on the ground.  David straddled Albert and it 
appeared to Kikku that David was going to throw the rocks onto 
Albert.  When Kikku began screaming, David looked up, threw the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
7 
 
 rocks away, and ran away.  Kikku and another person at the 
apartment carried Albert upstairs.  The paramedics arrived and 
attempted CPR, and at this time Kikku realized that Albert was 
bleeding and had been stabbed.  
Albert was taken to  the Hawaiʻi 
Medical Center West where he died at approximately 1:31 a.m. 
from a stab wound  that punctured his heart . 
2. The Defense’s Case   
After the prosecution rested its case, the defense 
called David as a witness.  David’s primary defense was that he 
acted in self -defense.  In his testimony, he disputed Kikku’s 
account.  He contended that he was invited into Kikku and Sam’s 
Awanei Street apartment and that Albert was the aggressor in the 
fatal confrontation. 
 
David testified that, prior to the confrontation at 
the Awanei Street apartment, on the evening of January 1, 2011, 
he attended a party at a relative’s  house in Kalihi.  At the 
party, Albert approached him and said, “why are you looking at 
me, you want me to beat you up.”  David did not respond.  David 
testified that after the threat from Albert, he left the 
apartment in Kalihi, and received a ride to Kikku and Sam’s 
Awanei Street apartment in Waipahu .  David denied Sam told him 
not to come inside to the party.  He maintained that  Sam never 
told him to go home.  He recalled that just before the police *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
8 
 
 arrived at the apartment, he was on the balcony and Albert was 
inside the apartment.  When the police arrived, both Da
vid and 
Albert went downstairs.  David te stified that he did not speak 
with the police when they came to the Awanei Street address. 
After the police left, David and Albert went back 
upstairs
 and sat at the table in the living room.  At that time, 
David told Albert to give him a beer , but according to David, 
Albert instead punched him and struck his nose with a beer 
bottle.  Albert told David “see, I can  — I can beat you up,” and 
David felt scared.  Albert then challenged David to follow him 
downstairs to the parking lot for a fight.7  
David remained 
sitting for a brief period, but eventually went downstairs 
because Albert was calling him  to come down to the parking lot, 
and David wanted “to tell [Albert] and beg hi m not to do that to 
me anymore.”
 
David testified that 
after he went downstairs  to the 
parking lot, he was walk ing between two parked cars, when Albert 
started kicking and punching him.  David fell down and Albert 
                     
7 Both David’s and Kikku’s testimony suggest that shortly after the 
police left, David and Albert went downstairs to fight.  Arlynn Ewen  Moses 
testified, however, that after the police left, David and Albert sat 
together, during which time she was able to go  to the store and return.  
Officer Randall Woo (Officer Woo)  testified that he responded to the call 
that initially brought him to the Awanei Street apartment  at 11:20 p.m.  He 
further testified that he returned to the same address an hour -and-a-half 
later after David and Albert had their confrontation .  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
9 
 
 continued kicking him.  While David was on the ground and Albert 
was kicking him, David got “something” in his hand, and  swung at 
Albert with it.  After that, David stood up and Albert stopped 
attacking him, backed off a little, and then he ran.  David ran 
after Albert because he was “getting mad” at him.  After he 
stopped and rested, David realized that Albert had injured him .8  
For this reason, he became “really mad ,” picked up two rocks,  
and walked back towards Kikku and Albert.    
Kikku struggled to take the rocks from David, but 
David overpowered her.
  David then walked away from Kikku and 
was “going to throw the rocks at [Albert],” but when he 
approached Albert and saw him lying on the ground, he threw the 
rocks away.  David then walked away; he did not  at that time 
think Albert was dead.   
3. Recess in the Defense’s Case and Bench Conference  
During a recess in David’s testimony  between direct 
and cross-examination, the State informed the court of its 
intent to call (1)
 Officer Woo as a rebuttal witness to show 
that David falsely testified he had not spoken to the police, 
and (2) Sam to show David falsely testified he was invited to 
the party inside the Awanei Street apartment.  With respect to 
                     
8 David’s testimony does not reflect what kind of injury he claims 
to have suffered. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
10 
 
 Officer Woo , the prosecutor stated that he “ha[d] been trying to 
reach one of [his] witnesses that [he] was not able to put on in 
[the] case-in-chief. . . . [I]t’s Officer Randall Woo, who [he 
was] still trying to contact.”  When asked by the court for an 
offer of proof as to the testimony of Officer Woo, the 
prosecutor stated, “Officer Woo is the officer who responded to 
the original call or complaint that there were males making 
noise.  He responded at about 11:30 to the Awanei Street address 
and spoke to both [Albert] and the defendant, which is contrary 
to what the defendant has testified to.”  To further challenge 
David’s credibility, the State sought to offer Sam’s testimony 
that David was never invited to his apartment.     
The defense objected to both rebuttal witnesses,  
arguing that , pursuant to  State v. Duncan , 101 Hawaiʻ i 269, 276  
67 P.3d 768, 775 (2003), the State should have presented the  
evidence from Officer Woo and Sam in its case- in-chief.  The 
defense argued that under  Duncan, the State was bound to give  
all available evidence in support of the charges against David  
in its case-in-chief, and was not permitted to withhold Officer  
Woo’s testimony until rebuttal.  Duncan, 101 Hawaiʻi at 276, 67 
P.3d at 775.  The State countered that it was unaware David 
would deny speaking to the police and that Officer Woo’s 
testimony only became relevant to David’s credibility once David  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
11 
 
 surprised the prosecution by claiming during his direct 
testimony he had not spoken to the police.  The defense raised 
the issue that in the police report the State relied upon for 
its theory of admiss ibility, “nowhere does Officer Woo identify 
Mr. David or Mr. Albert as the specific person he talked to.”  
The court allowed the State to present its two 
rebuttal witnesses for “the limited purpose” of establishing 
whether David was invited to the Awanei St reet apartment and 
whether David or Albert spoke to the police.  
4. The State’s Cross-Examination of David  
At the conclusion of the bench conference at which the 
court acceded to the State’s request to call two rebuttal 
witnesses, the State began cross- examination of David.  During 
its examination, the State focused on David’s testimony that he 
had not spoken to the police: 
Q:  Now, you testified last week that when the 
police come you did not talk to the police; correct?  
A:  No.  
Q:  Not at all? 
A:  No.  
Q:  Did the police officer come and tell you that 
you needed to leave the area?  
A:  No.  
. . . . 
Q:  So it’s your testimony that you did not speak 
to any police officer that night when they came over; 
correct? 
A:  Yes, I didn’t talk to them.  
Q:  And no police officer asked you to leave the 
area, is that what you’re telling us?  
A:  No. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
12 
 
 The prosecutor also asked David how he was wearing his hair on 
the night of the incident.  David testified that his hair was 
“not as long” but that it w as tied back with a rubber band.  In 
answer to the prosecutor’s questioning, he stated  that Albert 
had very short hair.      
5. The Rebuttal Testimony of Officer Woo  
  Officer Woo took the stand to rebut David’s testimony 
that neither David nor Albert spoke to the police on the night 
of the incident.  Officer Woo stated that he arrived at the 
Awanei Street apartment at approximately 11:30 p.m. on the 
evening of January 1, 2011 in response to a “susp icious 
circumstance” call from a female at the same address.  Upon 
arrival, he spoke to the female who called him.   Officer Woo 
also testified that he spoke to two other people  at the Awanei 
Street apartment: 
A: Other than the caller, I spoke with two male
s 
who were in the area.  
Q: In which area were you talking about? When you 
say in the area, could you be more specific?  
. . . . 
Q: Okay, the record indicate he’s indicating the 
parking lot fronting 84 or 94 -832 Awanei Street.  
Now, you spoke with – so did you speak with 
those males?  
A: Yes. 
Q: And could you describe them, give a description 
of each of the two males?  
A:
 Only one male stood out in particular that 
night, it was a Micronesian male with a ponytail . 
Q: You didn’t know his name at the time?  
A: No, I did not. 
 
(Emphasis added.)  Officer Woo did not describe the other male.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
13 
 
 After Officer Woo testified that he spoke with “ a 
Micronesian male with a ponytail ,” he continued his testimony by 
focusing on the male’s  (David’s)9 uncooperative behavior.  When 
Officer Woo was asked what he told “ that particular Micronesian 
male,” the officer testified  that David was uncooperative and 
repeatedly refused the orders of Officer Woo to leave the scene:  
A:
 The female wanted them to leave.  And I just 
related to both males that they didn’t live here, they 
needed to leave.  They need to get out of the area.  Go 
home or go to another friend’s house or somewhere else 
other than there.  
Q:  Now, the one with the ponytail, did he leave 
immediately?  
A: Not immediately, but he  left. 
Q:  Okay.  What do you mean by not immediately?  
A: Most times when we tell people they need to 
leave they’ll just turnaround [sic], walk away . 
 
In response to the testimony describing David’s 
uncooperative behavior, the defense objected based upon 
speculation and improper bolstering.  The court overruled 
the objection.  Officer Woo thus continued his response 
regarding David’s uncooperative  conduct in refusing to 
leave the area: 
A:
 Most time people will turnaround [sic] and say, 
okay, we’re leaving and they start to walk away.  This 
gentleman stayed in the parking lot and I told him one or 
two more times that he needed to go.  
. . . . 
                     
9  Officer Woo described the man as a “Micronesian male with a 
ponytail.”  The prosecutor had earlier elicited testimony from David that his 
hair was tied back in a ponytail on the night of the incident, and that he 
was in the parking lot area while the police were at the Awanei Street 
apartment.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
14 
 
 A: My main concern was the individual with the
 
ponytail because I had to tell him more than once to leave.  
 
(Emphasis added.)  The defense again objected , this time 
based on Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (1994)10:  
DEFENSE COUNSEL: I 'm going to object, Your  
Honor.  This is 404(b) actually at this point.  
 
Again, the court overruled defense counsel’s objection .  
After the objection was overruled, Officer Woo testified 
that he had to tell David to leave possibly up to four 
times and that David
 remained uncooperative: 
Q: Continue on, you had to what?  
A:
 Tell him more than once to leave.  
Q: How many times did you ask him to leave?  
A: I can’t remember the exact number, maybe about
 
two or three or maybe even four, I’m not too sure . 
Q: So what happened --  the first time you asked 
him to leave, did he walk the direction that you told him  
to the stop sign?  
A: No, the first time I asked him to leave he was 
in the parking lot area.  So then I asked him to leave, he  
didn’t. 
 So then I walked to the parking lot area, got  
closer to the male and then I told him to leave.  
                     
10  HRE Rule 404 (b) provides:  
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to 
prove the character of a person in order to show 
action in conformity therewith.  It may, however, be 
admissible where such evidence is probative of 
another fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action, such as proof of motive, 
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, 
identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake or 
accident.   In criminal cases, the proponent of 
evidence to be offered under this subsection shall 
provide reasonable notice in advance of trial, or 
during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on 
good cause shown, of the date, location, and general 
nature of any such evidence it intends to introduce 
at trial.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
15 
 
 Q: So you asked him once and he didn ’t move, okay.  
Did he appear to understand what you were  telling him?  How 
did you tell him?  
A: I told him, oh, she doesn ’t want you here.  You 
guys need to leave.  You don’ t live here, you guys  need to 
leave. 
Q:
 So he doesn’ t leave the parking lot area; 
right? 
A: No. 
Q: So what happens next?  
A: So I tell him again, and I ’m not too sure at 
that time or another time I had to tell him again , but I 
know I had to tell him more than once.   And when he did  
listen, then he walked the path I showed earlier on  Awanei. 
 
(Emphasis added.)  On cross-examination, Officer Woo 
acknowledged that the report he wrote after the incident 
did not 
contain a description of either of the males, nor did the report 
include any reference to either of them refusing to leave.  On 
re-direct, Officer Woo testified that,  an hour-and-a-half after 
he left the initial call, he was called back to the same 
residence for a “med assist, a defib- type case.”   
6. The State’s Closing Argument   
The State’s closing argument repeatedly referenced  the 
rebuttal testimony of Officer Woo.  The prosecutor sought to 
establish that, contrary to David’s testimony, David acted 
aggressively by refusing Officer  Woo’s instructions to leave 
Kikku’s Awanei Street apartment.  The State emphasized that it 
was necessary for Officer Woo  to ask David to leave the 
apartment area several times .  In so doing , the State used 
Officer Woo’s testimony to depict David’s uncooperative state of 
mind shortly before he stabbed Albert : *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
16 
 
 [T]he defendant goes onto [sic] say, well, the 
police came over, but I don’ t talk to them.  That’s 
an outright lie.  Not only was he spoken to, he was  
told to leave the premises twice by Officer Woo .  
Officer Randall Woo.   
. . . . 
 Now, bear in mind one -and-a-half hours later 
at 1:00 AM Officer Woo is called back to the same 
address, this time somebody is dead.  It was a 
different call, a defigrillator [sic] call.  But he 
eventually found out this is a homicide.  Somebody 
died.  And the suspect is . . . the same guy with the 
ponytail.   
And [Officer Woo] goes over, but the thing is 
the officer realizes, you know,  what happened at 
11:20 in the evening an hour -and-
a-half earlier may 
be important .  So I better make a miscellaneous pub 
report of that to document that I did go over to that 
house earlier because I may not remember if this ever 
becomes important . 
[H]e looks at that report he remembers the guy 
with the ponytail.  The guy that I had to tell twice 
to leave.  Is that the sign of a guy that’s scared as  
he would have told us ?  That’s the first signs  at 
least we have from Officer Woo that we have a person 
who’s not very cooperative, who refuses to leave the 
premises. . .  .  [Albert] left the premises 
immediately.  It was Mr. David that Officer Woo had 
to ask several times to leave . 
 
(Emphasis added.)  Accordingly, the prosecutor directly relied 
on Officer Woo’s testimony , which described David’s repeated 
refusal to follow the officer’s orders  despite being told to 
leave the premises “several times ,” in order to demonstrate that 
David was not “scared as he [] told us,” contradicting David’s 
testimony that he acted in self -defense.   
7. Verdict and Sentencing 
On October 13, 2011, the jury returned its verdict.  
As to count I,  murder in the second degree, the jury found David 
guilty of the lesser included offense of manslaughter.   As to 
count II, assault in the second degree, the jury found David *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
17 
 
 guilty of the lesser included offense of assault in the third 
degree.   
At the sentencing hearing on January 24, 2012, the 
State asked the court to impose a twenty- year sentence for the 
manslaughter conviction in order to send a message to the 
Micronesian community that it is unacceptable to drink alcohol 
and engage in violence: 
You know [David] comes from Micronesia, from Chuuk, 
and well, in this case, would provide just punishment for 
the offense.   
But what I wanted to focus on, Your Honor, is does 
this sentence under subsection B2, subsection B, afford 
adequate deterrence to criminal conduct?   
And when I talk about, perhaps, a sentence like this 
could save lives, I’m talking about sending a message  to 
the Micronesian community.   
Even more so than just a community, but I say this, 
by no means to be a racist about anything, but in my 
experience, and I believe in the Cou rt’s experience, as 
well as Mr.  Aquino’s experience, over the past few years, 
we have had a number of cases that have come in involving 
Chuukese, Micronesian males drinking, not high on drugs, 
like type of cases we’re more used to seeing, high on 
drugs, try to get drugs, commit offenses because of the 
need to get drugs or being high on drugs.   
But we’re talking Micronesians who get inebriated on 
alcohol, then become violent with their own family members, 
their own friends and they involve knives.  
It is the exact same situation that is before the 
Court today, and when you think about a sentence that needs 
to send a message out to the Micronesian community, mainly 
the males, the idea that they can just drink all they want 
and not be responsible for what happens after that, I think 
this would send a strong message to them that that is not 
acceptable in the laws of the United States and the laws of 
the State of Hawaiʻi.   
So we’re talking about affording adequate deterrence 
of criminal conduct by sending a message.  
 
When delivering the sentence, the court made the 
following remarks: *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
18 
 
  I think the root of all evils in this case was, 
obviously, alcohol.  
 Those of you who are in the gallery, you  seen 
or you - you see the devastating effects that alcohol 
can cause.  
 I guess it’s fun and it tastes good when you’ re 
drinking it at the time, but the taste of alcohol, 
obviously, doesn’t taste good as you sit there today.  
 No one can stop you from drinking alcohol, but 
those of you who are from the Micronesian Islands, 
you come here to start a legacy, and in this legacy, 
you don’t n eed that legacy tarnished by alcohol, 
because alcohol will leave the legacy of people 
getting killed and people being prosecuted and 
standing before a Court for wrongdoings.  That’s not 
what you need.   
 But my sentence today is not to send a message 
to you.  My message today is to address the specific 
conduct of Mr. David.  
 
The court sentenced David to twenty years imprisonment 
on count I and one year imprisonment on count II, to run 
concurrently. 
B. Intermediate Court of Appeals 
The ICA affirmed David’s conviction, holding that the 
court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the State’s 
rebuttal witnesses
 to testify .  However, the  ICA vacated David’s 
sentence and remanded for resentencing, on the grounds that 
comments made by the prosecutor during sentencing were “highly 
improper” and that the circuit court judge “did not go far 
enough to make its repudiation of the prosecutor’s improper 
arguments clear on the record.”  The ICA held that “a 
defendant’s race, ethnicity, or national origin cannot be used 
as a justification for the imposition of a harsher penalty on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
19 
 
 the defendant.”  The ICA therefore remanded for resentencing 
before a new judge.  
C. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
In his application for certiorari to this court, David 
presents two questions: 
I. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that 
the trial court did not abuse its discretion by 
allowing the State to present the testimony of 
two rebuttal witnesses.  
 
II. Given the egregious misconduct of the [DPA] 
during the sentencing hearing, whether the ICA 
gravely erred in remanding this case for 
resentencing rather than for a new trial.  
 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Admissibility of Rebuttal Testimony 
“With respect to the admissibility of rebuttal 
testimony, the standard on appeal is abuse of discretion.  This 
court has declared that ‘[t]he introduction of evidence in 
rebuttal and in surrebuttal is a matter within the discretion of 
the trial court and appellate courts will not interfere absent 
abuse thereof.’”  Duncan, 101 Hawai ʻi at 274, 67 P.3d at 773 
(2003) (quoting Takayama v. Kaiser Found. Hosp. , 82 Hawai ʻi 486, 
495, 923 P.2d 903, 912 (1996)) . 
B. Abuse of Discretion 
“The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly 
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles 
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
20 
 
 litigant.”  State v. Plichta
, 116 Hawai ʻi 200, 214, 172 P.3d 512, 
526 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  
 C. Prosecutorial Misconduct  
 
 “Allegations of pro secutorial misconduct are reviewed 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which 
requires an examination of the record and a determination of 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error 
complained of might have contributed to th e conviction.”  State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai ʻi 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(quoting State v. Sawyer , 88 Hawaiʻi 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 
641 n.6 (1998)) (internal quotation marks and citations 
omitted).  
  “Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the 
prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant’s right to a 
fair trial.”  State v. McGriff , 76 Hawaiʻi 148, 158, 871 P.2d 
782, 792 (1994).  “In order to determine whether the alleged 
prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error, 
[the appellate court considers] the nature of the alleged 
misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, 
and the strength or weak ness of the evidence against defendant.”  
State v. Agrabante , 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
21 
 
 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Officer Woo’s Testimony Was Inadmissible on Rebuttal 
and Its Admission W as Not Harmless Error 
David argues the circuit court abused its discretion 
by allowing Officer Woo to testify as a rebuttal witness because 
the State was required to introduce Officer Woo’s  testimony in 
its case-in -chief under Duncan.11  According to David, Officer 
Woo’s rebuttal testimony that David refused to leave the p arking 
lot established David’s belligerent state of mind prior to the 
stabbing, thus suggesting that David possessed the requisite 
criminal intent to commit the murder of Albert and the assault 
of Kikku.  Consequently, David maintains that the State was 
required to introduce Officer Woo’s testimony in the State’s 
case-in-chief, citing Duncan.  See Duncan , 101 Hawaiʻi at 276, 67 
P.3d at 775 (“[A] party is bound to give all available evidence 
in support of an issue in the first instance it is raised at 
trial and will not be permitted to hold back evidence 
confirmatory of his or her case and then offer it on 
rebuttal.”).   The State maintains it did not expect David to 
testify that he did not speak with the police that night, and 
                     
11  David’s application for writ of certiorari purports to challenge 
“two rebuttal witnesses,” but only raises objections to the testimony of 
Officer Woo (not the State’s other rebuttal witness, Erick Sam).  
Accordingly, we only discuss Officer Woo’s rebuttal testimony.      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
22 
 
 therefore Officer Woo’s testimon y was offered in rebuttal merely 
to contradict David’s testimony.  
The State explained its need for Officer Woo’s 
rebuttal testimony during a bench conference.  As its offer of 
proof, the State informed the court that Officer Woo responded 
to the call at the Awanei Street address and “spoke to both 
[Albert] and the defendant, which is contrary to what the 
defendant has testified to.”   Defense counsel objected to the 
rebuttal testimony based on  Duncan, arguing that the State 
should have introduced his testimony during its case- in-chief.  
The State argued that Officer Woo was being called in rebuttal 
because the State “did not know at the time prior to the 
defendant testifying []  that he [would say that he] didn’t speak 
with the police” and that Officer Woo’s  “offer of testimony 
would be, that he did speak, he spoke with both [Albert] and the 
defendant.”  Defense counsel again objected, arguing that the 
State was “aware of this officer, they were aware what the 
officer was going to testify to, they had the polic e report.”   
The court overruled the defense’s objections to Officer Woo’s 
rebuttal testimony.  After David’s direct testimony, the trial 
was recessed for the weekend.   
The State began its cross -examination the following 
Monday.  At no time prior to the cross-examination – or prior to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
23 
 
 Officer Woo’s subsequent rebuttal testimony - did the State 
disclose to David or the court its intent to also introduce to 
the jury through its rebuttal witness David’s uncooperative 
refusal to comply with Officer Woo’s order to leave the 
apartment area where David later stabbed Albert.  During David’s 
cross-examination, the State confirmed with David that he had 
not spoken to the 
police.  T he State then called Off icer Woo as 
a rebuttal witness.     
1. Officer Woo’s Testimony  Identifying David as 
Uncooperative was Inadmissible on Rebuttal 
As it proposed in its offer of proof, the State called 
Officer Woo to testify in rebuttal for the ostensible purpose of 
impeaching David.  However,  rather than limiting the officer’s 
testimony to the fact that he did speak to someone matching 
David’s description in the Awanei Street parking lot, Officer 
Woo presented testimony that went far beyond impeachment 
evidence as it instead adduced substantive evidence of David’s 
uncooperative behavior preceding his altercation with Albert.  
Thus, as David observed in his opening brief to the ICA, under 
“the guise of impeaching Defendant’s credibility” the State 
presented testimony on rebuttal that went beyond the purpose 
represented in its offer of proof. 
 In so doing,  it improperly 
bolstered the State’s case that David acted as the first 
aggressor in unjustifiably causing the death of Albert. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
24 
 
 By using this tactic, the State exceeded the scope of 
rebuttal testimony permitted by the court, which the court 
allowed only for the “limited purpose” of impeaching David’s 
testimony that he did not speak to the police.  Initially, 
Officer Woo’s rebuttal testimony  stayed within the parameters 
established by the court.  Officer Woo refuted David’s testimony 
that neither David nor Albert spoke to the police on the night 
of the incident.   He stated that he arrived at the Awanei Street 
apartment at approximately 11:30 p.m. on the evening of January 
1, 2011 in response to a “suspicious circumstance” call from a 
female at the same address.  Upon arrival, he  spoke to the 
female who called him.  Subsequently, Officer Woo spoke to two 
males in the parking lot; he identified one as “a Micronesian 
male with a ponytail.”     
Thereafter,  Officer Woo’s testimony far exceeded the 
limited scope of rebuttal testimony  permitted by the court.  In 
addition to contradicting David’s testimony on cross -examination 
that he did not talk to the police prior to the incident, 
Officer Woo testified that the male with the ponytail was 
uncooperative and refused to leave the parking lot after Officer 
Woo’s multiple orders.  Officer Woo testified that he told the 
two males they needed to leave the area because “the female 
wanted them to leave,”  but the man with the ponytail did not *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
25 
 
 leave immediately, despite repeated orders by Officer Woo.  
Officer Woo stressed that, unlike the usually cooperative people 
he encounters, David did not cooperate when he told him to leave 
the area: “[m]ost times when we tell people  they need to leave 
they’ll just turnaround [sic], walk away. . . .  This gentleman 
stayed in the parking lot and I told him one or two more times 
that he needed to go.”  To this testimony, the defense properly 
objected on the basis of speculation and improper bolstering.   
Officer Woo’s view of how other people would behave in David’s 
place constituted speculation  as to what other people would do 
in David’s situation; his testimony  also bolstered  his testimony 
by comparing David’s behavior to that of most people who would 
have cooperated with police instruction.   
With the defense’s first objection overruled, the 
State continued offering testimony that exceeded the scope of 
testimony permitted by the court.  Officer Woo noted  that, after  
“the other male” left the area , his “main concern was the 
individual with the ponytail because [he]  had to tell him more 
than once to leave.”  The defense asserted another objection  to 
the unexpected testimony,  citing HRE Rule 404(b) .  Defense 
counsel established that Officer Woo’s testimony improperly 
introduced substantive evidence of prior bad conduct – thereby 
exceeding the limited scope of rebuttal testimony.   HRE Rule 404 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
26 
 
 proscribes the use of character evidence to prove conduct, 
subject to exceptions:  
(a) Character evidence generally.  Evidence of a person’ s 
character or a trait of a person’ s character is not 
admissible for the purpose of proving action in conformity 
therewith on a particular occasion, except:  
(1) Character of accused.  Evidence of a pertinent 
trait of character of an accused offered by an 
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the same;  
(2) Character of victim.   Evidence of a pertinent 
trait of character of the victim of the crime offered 
by an accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the 
same, or evidence of a character trait of 
peacefulness of the victim offered by the prosecution 
in a homicide case to rebut evidence that the victim 
was the first aggressor;  
(3) Character of witness.  Evidence of the character 
of a witness, as provided in rules 607, 608, 609, and 
609.1. 
 
HRE Rule 404(a).  In criminal cases, the proponent of evidence 
of other crimes, wrongs, or acts probative of another fact of 
consequence “shall provide reasonable notice in advance of 
trial, or during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on 
good cause shown, of the date, location, and general nature of 
any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial.”  HRE Rule 
404(b).  Here, Officer Woo’s testimony fell within the 
proscription of HRE Rule 404(b) because it presented evidence of 
David’s bad character :  his multiple refusals to comply with 
Officer Woo’s orders to  leave the premises.     
Even supposing that the State could show good cause 
for not providing reasonable notice of this character evidence 
in advance of trial, reasonable notice was  required during trial 
once it became known to the State.  Although the  State provided *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
27 
 
 Officer Woo’s police report, the report did not identify David 
or Albert, and it only explained that the police spoke with an 
undescribed male, saying nothing about the male’s refusal to 
comply with Officer Woo’s repeated orders to leave.  Thus, the 
State exceeded the scope of rebuttal testimony allowed by the 
court and failed  to give reasonable notice that substantive 
evidence of David’s bad character would be presented in 
rebuttal.  Given defense counsel’s  timely objection s to Officer 
Woo’s testimony as it exceeded  the limited scope permitted by 
the court, the  testimony depicting Davi d’s unwillingness to 
comply with repeated, direct orders from a uniformed officer was 
inadmissible on rebuttal.  
2. The Erroneous Admission of Officer Woo’s Rebuttal 
Testimony Was Not Harmless 
The introduction of Officer Woo’s improper rebuttal 
testimony over the defense’s objections was not harmless.  In 
Duncan, we held that improper testimony impeaching a defendant’s 
credibility on rebuttal was not harmless when the defendant’s 
credibility was “the linchpin of his defense” because there was 
a “reasonable poss ibility that the erroneous admission of [the 
witness’s] testimony contributed to [the defendant’s] 
conviction.”  Duncan , 101 Hawaiʻi at 278, 67 P.3d at 777.   
Similarly , David’s demeanor leading up to  the 
altercation was  a “linchpin  of his defense.”   It was relevant to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
28 
 
 his claim that he acted in self-defense.  Officer Woo’s 
testimony refuted David’s self -defense claim because David’s 
uncooperative behavior with Officer Woo tended to show that 
David acted as the first aggressor in his  altercation with 
Albert.  Indeed, in closing argument, the State  argued against 
David’s contention that he acted in self -defense by citing 
Officer Woo’s improper rebuttal testimony to demonstrate that 
David was not scared in his altercation with Albert.   The State 
stressed that David was “not very cooperative” ; and noted that 
Officer Woo had to tell David to leave “several times”  in 
contrast to Albert, who “left the premises immediately .”  After 
comparing David’s refusal to cooperate with Albert’s cooperative 
behavior, the p rosecutor asked the jury “[i]s that the sign of a 
guy that’ s scared  as he would have told us? ”  Thus, Officer 
Woo’s testimony comparing David’s uncooperative behavior  to 
Albert’s impliedly cooperative behavior constituted a formidable 
confirmation to the jury that David unjustifiably killed Albert. 
Moreover, Officer Woo’s rebuttal testimony identifying 
David as uncooperative carried the great persuasive import of an 
inherently credible and objective police officer observer.  I ts 
importance to the State’s ca se was paramount.  In its case- in-
chief, the State elicited testimony from Kikku seeking to show 
that David was drunk and acted aggressively towards Albert on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
29 
 
 the night of the murder.12  Officer Woo’s testimony, specifically 
describing his repeated statemen ts to David and David’s refusals 
to comply, substantially reinforced Kikku’s direct testimony .  
The only witness who testified to seeing the initial altercation 
between David and Albert besides David himself was Kikku, 
Albert’s aunt.  Officer Woo’s imprope r rebuttal testimony 
provided contradictory evidence to David’s testimony regarding 
who was the first aggressor.13  Thus, given that  the rebuttal 
testimony described David’s uncooperative state of mind prior to 
his stabbing of Albert, there is a reasonable possibility that 
Officer Woo’s testimony depicting David as repeatedly refusing 
to comply with his orders contributed to David’s conviction.  We 
hold that the erroneous admission of Offic er Woo’s  rebuttal 
testimony was not harmless.  
 
 
                     
12  Kikku testified that David had demanded all the beer that  Albert 
had refused to give to David before leaving Kalihi and going  to the Awanei 
Street apartment; that David was not invited into the Awanei Street 
apartment; and that David appeared to threaten Albert by telling him “no man 
can do this to me” in response to receiving a scratch on the nose from an 
earlier altercation.  The State also elicited testimony from Arlynn Ewen  
Moses, who corroborated Kikku’s testimony that David was not invited into the 
Awanei Street apartment and that  David and Albert had been fighting earlier 
in the evening.  
 
13   Kikku testified that she saw David hit Albert in the back of the 
head, but she did not  witness the fatal stabbing . 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
30 
 
 B. Improper C omments During Sentencing  
Because we
 rule in favor of David regarding part of 
his first question on certiorari, holding that the erroneous 
admission of Officer Woo’s rebuttal testimony was not harm less, 
we need not resolve his second question:  whether improper 
statements by the prosecutor at the sentencing hearing required 
a new trial rather than the resentencing ordered by the ICA.  
Based on the importance of the second question, however, we 
exercise our supervisory powers under HRS § 602-4 (2016)14 to 
provide guidance to the trial courts.  
In his opening brief to the ICA, David argued that the 
prosecutor’s “racist and sexist remarks” improperly influenced 
the circuit court.  The ICA held that the prosecutor’s comments 
were 
“highly improper ” and that the circuit court judge “did not 
go far enough to make its repudiation of the prosecutor’s 
improper arguments clear on the record.”  The ICA therefore 
remanded for resentencing before a new judge.  
We concur with the ICA that comments made during the 
sentencing hearing15 were improper.  See Rogan, 91 Hawaiʻi at 414-
                     
14  HRS § 602 -4 provides, “Superintendence of inferior courts . The 
supreme court shall have the general superintendence of all courts of 
inferior jurisdiction to prevent and correct errors and abuses therein where 
no other remedy is expressly provided by law.”  
15  The prosecutor’s relevant remarks at sentencing, as excerpted in 
part II.A. 7. above, were as follows:     
(. . . continued)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
31 
 
 15, 984 P.2d at 1240- 41 (“[A]rguments by the prosecution 
contrived to stimulate racial prejudice . . . threaten[] our 
multicultural society and constitutional values. . . . [A]ppeals 
                                                                  
(continued. . . ) 
 
You know [David] comes from Micronesia, from Chuuk, 
and well, in this case, would provide just punishment for 
the offense.   
 
But what I wanted to focus on, Your Honor, is does 
this sentence under subsection B2, subsection B, afford 
adequate deterrence to criminal conduct?   
 
And when I talk about, perhaps, a sentence like this 
could save lives, I’m talking about sending a messag e to 
the Micronesian community .   
 
Even more so than just a community, but I say this, 
by no means to be a racist about anything, but in my 
experience, and I believe in the Court's experience, as 
well as Mr. Aquino’s experience, over the past few years, 
we have had a number of cases that have come in involving 
Chuukese, Micronesian males drinking , not high on drugs, 
like type of cases we’re more used to seeing, high on 
drugs, try to get drugs, commit offenses because of the 
need to get drugs or being high on drugs.   
 
But we’re talking Micronesians who get inebriated on 
alcohol, then become violent with their own family members,
their own friends and they involve knives.   
  
It is the exact same situation that is before the 
Court today, and when you think about a sentence that needs 
to send a message out to the Micronesian community , mainly 
the males, the idea that they can just drink all they want 
and not be responsible for what happens after that, I think 
this would send a strong message to them that that is  not 
acceptable in the laws of the United States and  the laws of 
the State of Hawaiʻi.   
 
So we’re talking about affording adequate deterrence 
of criminal conduct by sending a message.  
 
(Emphases added.) 
 
 In addition, as also excerpted in part II.A.7., above, although the 
court stated that its sentence was not to send a message to the Micronesian 
community, it referred to the community before imposing sentence .   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAII REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
32 
 
 to racial prejudice lack the professionalism and decorum 
required of attorneys who practice before the bar of the courts 
of Hawaiʻi and will not be tolerated.”).  The ICA also correctly 
concluded that the  circuit court did not meet its burden to 
repudiate the improper remarks made by the prosecutor when he 
appealed to race in arguing for a sentence that would “send a 
message to the Micronesian community.”      
V. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate th e ICA’s judgment 
on appeal and the circuit court’s judgment of conviction and 
sentence, and remand the case to the circuit court for a new 
trial. 
Craig W. Jerome   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
for petitioner 
 
   
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama    
James M. Anderson       
and Loren J. Thomas
   /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
for respondent  
   
    
  /s/ Richard W. Pollack  
       
      /s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
 
