***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
EDWARD G. STANLEY, Petitioner/Petitioner- Appellant,  
  
vs. 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I
, Respondent/Respondent- Appellee.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-18-0000141 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-18-0000141; S.P.P. NO. 17-1-0007; (CR. NO. 1PC880000418)) 
 
JANUARY 5, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, AND WILSON, JJ., 
 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE MORIKAWA, IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J., RECUSED  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction  
 Edward G. Stanley (“Stanley”) , pro se, appeals the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit’s (“circuit court”)1 denial of his 
second Hawaiʻi Rules of Pena l Procedure (“HRPP”) Rule 40  petition 
for post -conviction relief  (“Second Petition”).   
 
1  The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided over the Second Petition at issue 
in this certiorari proceeding.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-18-0000141
05-JAN-2021
10:11 AM
Dkt. 13 OP***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
2 
  Stanley’s Second Petition arises from  a March 16,  1988 
conviction .  A jury convicted Stanley of two counts of first 
degree reckless endangering , as lesser included offenses of 
attempted first degree  murder (Counts I and II) ; one count of 
attempted first degree murder  (Count III) ; one count of 
attempted m anslaughter, as a le sser included offense of  
attempted second degree murder  (Count V) ; and one count of place 
to keep firearm  (Count VI) .2  On September 23, 1988, t he trial 
court sentenced Stanley to five -year terms of  imprisonment for 
Counts I and II, life without the possibili ty of parole for 
Count III, ten  years with a mandatory minimum of f ive years for 
Count V, and five  years for Count VI .  All sentences  were to be 
served concurrently.  
 In 1989, Stanley’s direct ap peal from his  1988 convictions  
was rejected by this court in a brief memorandum opinion .  His 
first HRPP Rule 40 petition (“First Petition”)  in 1992, alleging 
different grounds than those contained in th is Second Petition, 
was rejected by this court in a 1994 published opinion.   His 
2001 HRPP Rule 35 motion was also denied  by the circuit court, 
from which he did not appeal .   
 Thereafter, Stanley filed the subject  Second Petition  in 
2017, in which he a lleged, in relevant part,  that his conviction 
of attempted manslaughter in Count V was based on reckless 
 
2  Regarding Count IV, see infra text accompanying and footnote 8.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
3 
 conduct, and theref ore, his sentence was illegal, citing to 
State v. Pinero , 70 Haw. 509, 778 P.2d 704 (1989), State v. 
Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi 27, 904 P.2d 912 (1995), reconsideration 
denied, 80 Hawaiʻi 187, 907 P.2d 773 (1995), and State v. Loa , 83 
Hawaiʻi 335, 926 P.2d 1258 (1996) , which held  that because the  
only non -exculpatory circumstance legally capable of mitigating 
murder to manslaughte r is the mitigation of extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable 
explanation (“EMED”) , there is no offense of attempted 
involuntary manslaughter based on reckless conduct (“ attempted 
reckless manslaughter”) . 
The circuit court denied Stanley’s Second Petiti on without 
an evidentiary hearing .  Stanley appealed  the denial of the 
Second Petition  to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA” ).   
In its summary disposition order  (“SDO”), the ICA affirmed 
the circuit court’s denial of the Second Petition.   See Stanley 
v. State , CAAP-18-0000141, 2019 WL 3976129  (App. Aug. 22, 2019) 
(SDO).  The ICA ruled, inter alia,  that Stanley failed to 
demonstrate he was convicted of attempted reckless manslaughter , 
thereby failing to state a colorable claim that his sentence  for 
Count V was illegal.   The ICA also ruled Stanley was not 
entitled to relief under HRPP Rule 40 based on  the equal 
protection claim alleged on  appeal because he had not raised the 
issue before the circuit court in the Second Petition  and failed ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
4 
 to prove the existence of extraordinary circumstances justifying 
his failure to raise th at claim .  
 We hold the  ICA erred in affirming the  circuit court ’s 
ruling that  Stanley failed to state a colorable claim that he 
was convicted of attempted reckless manslaughter  in his Second 
Petition .  This error requires vacatur of his attempted 
manslaughter conviction  in Count V .  On remand, double jeopardy 
principles bar  the State from retrying Stanley for attempted 
second degree murder in Count V. 
 Accordingly, we vacate  the ICA’s October 2, 2019  judgment 
on appeal  entered pursuant to its August 22, 2019 SDO, Stanley’s 
1988 conviction for attempted manslaughter  in Count V , and the 
circuit court’s February 23, 2018 order denying Stanley’s Second 
Petition , and we remand  this case  to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
II. Background  
A. Factual background  
This case arose from a March 11, 1988 incident in which 
Stanley fired gunshots in the vicinity of several individuals, 
including two police officers , at different intervals, and had 
also pointed, but not fired, a gun at another police officer.  
State v. Stanley , No. 13402, at 1 -2 (Haw. De c. 14, 1989) (mem.) 
(“Stanley I ”).   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
5 (continued  . . .) 
 On March 16, 1988, a grand jury indicted Stanley with three 
counts of  attempted first degree murder  in violation of Hawaiʻi 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) §§ 705 -500 (1985),3 707-701(1)(b) (Supp. 
1988),4 and 706-656 (Supp. 1988)5 (Counts I, II, and III);  one 
 
3  HRS § 705 -500 (1985) states:  
 
§705-500 Criminal attempt.   (1) A person is guilty of an 
attempt to commit a crime if he:  
 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant 
circumstances were as he believes them to be; 
or  
 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under 
the circumstances as he believes them to be, 
constitutes a substantial step in a course of 
conduct intended to culminate in his commission 
of the crime.  
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of the 
crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime 
if, acting with the state of mind required to establish 
liability with respect to the attendant  circumstances 
specified in the definition of the crime, he intentionally 
engages in conduct which is a substantial step in a course 
of conduct intended or known to cause such a result.  
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step 
under this sec tion unless it is strongly corroborative of 
the defendant’s criminal intent.  
 
4  HRS § 707 -701(1)(b) (Supp. 1988) states:  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of murder in the first 
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the 
death of:  
 
. . . . 
 
(b) A peace officer, judge, or prosecutor arising out 
of the performance of official duties[.]  
 
5  HRS § 706 -656 (Supp. 1988) states:  
 
§706-656 Terms of imprisonment for first and second degree 
murder and attempted first and second degree murder.  (1) 
Persons convicted of first degree murder or first degree ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
6 
 count of attempted first degree murder  in violation of        
HRS §§ 705 -500, 707 -701(1)(a) ,6 and 706-656 (Count IV);  one count 
of attempted second degree murder  in violation of             
HRS §§ 7 05-500, 707 -701.5(1) (Supp. 1988 ), and 706 -656 (Count 
V); and one count of place to keep firearm  in violation of    
HRS § 134 -6 (1985) (Count VI).7   
 The jury trial began on August 8, 1988.  On August 16, 
1988, the trial court acquitted Stanley of  attempted first 
degree murder in  Count IV.8  After the close of the parties’ 
(. . . continued) 
attempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment 
without possibility of parole.  
 
 As part of such sentence the court shall order the 
director of the department of corrections and the Hawaii 
paroling authority to prepare an application for the 
governor to commute the sentence to life imprisonment with 
parole at the end of twenty years of imprisonment; provided 
that persons who are repeat offenders under section 706 -
606.5 shall serve at least the applicable mandatory minimum 
term of imprisonment.  
 
. . . . 
 
6  HRS § 707 -701(1)(a) (Supp. 1988) states:  
 
(1) A person commits the offense of murder in the first 
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the 
death of:  
 
(a) More than one person in the same or separate 
incident[.]  
 
7  Each count of attempted murder involved a different complaining 
witness.  
 
8  Although Stanley had stated the trial court acquitted him of attempted 
first degree murder in Count IV for insufficient evidence, th e record 
indicates the trial court acquitted Stanley of Count IV because it involved 
the same police officers in Counts I and III.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
7 
 arguments, t he trial court  read, and provided to the jury in 
writing for its deliberations,  as follows : 
If you are unable to find that the offense of 
attempted murder in the first degree or second degree has 
been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, you may then 
consider whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of 
the included offense of attempted manslaughter.  
In a prosecution for attempted murder in the first 
degree or second degree, attempted manslaughter is an 
included offense.  The offense of attempted manslaughter is 
committed if the defendant attempted to recklessly cause 
the death of another person.  
In a prosecution for attempted murder in the first 
degree or second degree, it is also a defense, which 
reduces the offense to attempted manslaughter, that the 
defendant was, at the time he attempted to cause the death 
of another person, under the influence of extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable 
explanation.  The reasonable -ness of the explanation shall 
be determined from the vi ewpoint of a person in the 
defendant’s situation under the circumstances as he 
believed them to be.  
The burden is upon the State to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant was not acting under 
the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturb ance 
for which there is a reasonable explanation.  If the State 
has not done so, you must find the defendant guilty of the 
included offense of attempted manslaughter.  If the State 
has done so, you must find the defendant guilty of the 
offense of attempted  murder in the first degree or second 
degree. 
 If you cannot agree that the prosecution has proven 
all of the elements of the offenses of attempted murder in 
the first degree or second degree or attempted manslaughter 
beyond a reasonable doubt, you may con sider the included 
offense of reckless endangering in the first degree. 
 A person commits the offense of reckless endangering 
in the first degree if he intentionally fires a firearm in 
a manner which places another person in danger of death or 
serious bodily injury.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 As to each count, you may bring in either one of the 
following verdicts:  
 
 . . . . 
 
As to Count III, attempted murder in the first 
degree: 
1. Not guilty; or  
    2. Guilty as charged; or  
  3. Guilty of the included offense of 
attempted manslaughter; or  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
8 (continued  . . .) 
   4. Guilty of the included offense of 
reckless endangering in the first degree. 
 
 As to Count V, attempted murder in the second degree: 
       1. Not guilty; or  
                        2. Guilty as charged; or  
3. Guilty of the included offense of 
attempted manslaughter; or  
4.    Guilty of the included offense of 
reckless endangering in the first degree. 
 
 The jury began  its deliberations on August 16, 1988.  
During its deliberations, the jury transmitted, in relevant 
part, three written communications to the trial court.  First, 
the jury requested in relevant part: “We would like a definition 
of attempted manslaughter  & attempted to recklessly  cause of  
[sic] death.”  The trial court responded in relevant part: 
“Please refer to the copy of the Court’s instructions which have 
been provided to you.”   
Second, the jury again inquired: “ We request an explanation 
as to the law what attempted manslaughter entails. ”  The trial 
court responded: “I regret that I cannot provide you with any 
further clarification on this question as you already have the 
Penal Code definition of Attempted Manslaughter in the Court’s 
Instructions.”   
Third, the jury requested : “We request a copy of Black’s 
Law Dictionary.”9  The trial court responded : “The dictionary 
 
9  During the trial court’s discussion with the State and defense counsel 
after the jury requested a copy of Black’s Law Di ctionary , the State admitted 
it appeared the jury was confused as to what attempted manslaughter and 
attempted reckless manslaughter entailed, stating: “Your Honor, apparently 
what’s going on here in the tone of these communications, it’s become readily ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
9 
 definition s may not be consistent with the language utilized by 
the Legislature in the statutes, therefore, I am sorry to inform 
you that I am unable to grant the request.”   
Two days later , on August 18, 1988, the jury found Stanle y 
guilty of: two counts of first degree reckless e ndangering , as 
lesser included offenses of attempted  first degree murder  
(Counts I and II) ; one count of attempted  first degree murder  
(Count III); one count of attempted m anslaughter , as a lesser 
included offense of attempted  second degree murder  (Count V) ; 
and one count of place to keep firearm  (Count VI).  On September 
23, 1988, the trial co urt entered its amended judgment, 
sentencing Stanley to a five-year indeterminate term of 
imprisonment for Counts I,  II, and VI; life imprisonment without 
the possibili ty of parole for Count III; and  a ten-year 
indeterminate term of imprisonment with a man datory minimum of 
five years for Count V .  The sentences were to be served 
concurrently.   
B. Procedural background  
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)  (2006) provides :  
 
(3) Inapplicability .  Rule 40 proceedings shall not be 
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where 
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled 
upon or were waived.  Except for a claim of illegal 
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly 
and understandingly failed to raise it and it could have 
(. . . continued) 
apparent that the jury is lost in confusion on the question of what is 
attempted manslaughter and attempted to recklessly cause the death[.]”   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
10 
 been raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal , in a 
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually 
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated 
under this rule , and the petitioner is unable to prove the 
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the 
petitioner ’s failure to raise the issue.   There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or 
to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure.  
 
Because th e rule prohibits relief when issues have been 
previously ruled upon or have been waived , we briefly summarize  
Stanley’s direct appeal and his previous petitions.  
 1. Stanley’s direct appeal and previous petitions  
  a. Direct appeal  
 On October 21, 1988, Stanley directly  appealed his 
conviction s to this court , alleging four points of error : (1) 
“erroneous attempted first degree murder and attempted 
manslaughter instructions” ; (2) “deputy prosecutor’s improper 
comment during closing rebuttal argument” ; (3) “insufficient 
evidence to support the attempted first degree murder 
conviction” ; and (4) “unlawful imposition of sentence in the 
form of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole for 
the attempted first degree murder conviction.”  Stanley I , mem. 
op. at 2.   
In a two -page memorandum opinion, this court summarized 
Stanley’s conviction s, facts, and four points of error  alleged 
on appeal,  and affirmed Stanley’s convictions and  held that 
“[b]ased  on a careful review of the record, we discern no 
reversible error.  Affirmed.”  Id. ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
11 
 b. Stanley’s  two petitions for a writ of habeas 
corpus 
 
 As indicated in Stanley v. State , 76 Hawaiʻi 446, 879 P.2d 
551 (1994) (“ Stanley II ”), after this court affirmed his 
conviction s in 1989, Stanley filed a petition for a writ of 
habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the 
District of  Hawaiʻi (“district court”) .10  76 Hawaiʻi at 448, 879 
P.2d at 553.   He alleged: “(1) erroneous jury instructions;  (2) 
‘improper statement made;’ and (3) ‘insufficient evidence to 
support guilt findings.’”  Id.  After an evidentiary hearing, 
the district court denied Stanley’s petition for a writ of 
habeas corpus on October 11, 1991.  Id.   
 Stanley then filed a second petition for  a writ of habeas 
corpus in the district court, raising identical grounds as the  
previous petition for  a writ of habeas corpus.  Id.  On January 
1, 1992, the district court denied his second petition without 
holding an evidentiary hearing.  Id.   
  c. First HRPP Rule 40 petition11 
 On February 26, 1992, Stanley fi led his First Petition in 
the circuit court,12 alleging : “(1) he was deni ed effective 
assistance of counsel; and (2) his convictions for attempted 
 
10  The record does not contain Stanley’s two petitions for a writ of 
habeas corpus.  
 
11  The record does not contai n the First Petition.  
 
12  The Honorable Gail C. Nakatani presided.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
12 
 first degree murder and attempted manslaughter were not 
supported by substantial evidence. ”  Id.  On June 4, 1992, the 
circuit court denied the  First Petition without a hearing, 
finding “said petition to be patently frivolous and without a 
trace of support either in the record or from other evidence 
submitted by the Petitioner.”  Id. 
 Stanley appealed the circuit court’s denial of his First 
Petition to this court .  Id.  He argued: (1) “the trial court 
erred in denying his petition because the denial was contrary to 
an earlier decision by a judge determining that his petition was 
meritorious”; (2) “because the trial court made no findings of 
fact or conclusions of law in de nying the petition, the 
resultant order is ‘patently wrong, and without a trace of 
support’”; (3) “the trial court erroneously denied him a     
HRPP Rule 40 hearing despite Appellant having asserted valid 
grounds for his unlawful detention, namely: [(a)] d enial of 
effective assistance of counsel; and [(b)] insufficient evidence 
to support the attempted first degree murder and attempted 
manslaughter convictions ”; and (4) “the trial court erred when 
it refused certain jury instructions relating to the attempt ed 
first degree murder conviction.”  76 Hawaiʻi at 448-51, 879 P.2d 
at 553-56.   
 
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
13 (continued  . . .) 
   d. Stanley II  
 In a published opinion,  this court  rejected Stanley’s 
points of error  and affirmed the circuit court’s denial of his 
First Petition ; however, this court declined to rule on 
Stanley’s fourth point of error  because Stanley had failed to 
raise the issue in his First Petition .13  Stanley II , 76 Hawaiʻi 
at 452, 879 P.2d at 5 57. 
 
13  This court applied the rationale in Bryant v. State , 6 Haw. App. 331, 
720 P.2d 1015 (1986), disapproved on other grounds  by Briones v. State , 74 
Haw. 442, 848 P.2d 966 (1993), in which the ICA found the “[f]ailure to raise 
[a Rule 40 issue] . . . specifically in the petition does not per se defeat 
the possibility of obtaining relief on that ground in the Rule 40 
proceeding,” and that “a pro se petition er ‘should not suffer for his 
inability to articulate his claim.’”  Stanley II , 76 Hawaiʻi at 451, 879 P.2d 
at 556 (alterations and ellipsis in original) (quoting Bryant, 6 Haw. App. at 
334-35, 720 P.3d at 1018 -19).  We distinguished Bryant from the case:  
 
Applying the above rationale, Appellant’s failure to raise 
the erroneous exclusion of jury instructions allegation in 
his petition would apparently not prevent him from 
asserting the same on appeal.  The instant case, however, 
is easily distinguished from  Bryant. 
In Bryant , because at the trial level: (1) the State 
was alerted to the general issue; (2) the petitioner, 
subsequent to the filing of the initial petition at the 
trial level, clearly raised the specifics of the issue in a 
subsequent memorandum in support of the pet ition; (3) the 
State responded to the issue in a supplemental memorandum; 
(4) the trial court considered the issue; and, most 
importantly, (5 ) HRPP Rule 40(e) provides that amendments 
to the petition shall be freely allowed, the ICA concluded 
that despite the petitioner ’s failure to specifically 
allege the factual basis of his claim for relief, the claim 
would survive as an amendment to the petition.  
In the instant case, unlike Bryant , Appellant did not 
alert the State to the general issue of erroneous deni al of 
jury instructions.  Consequently, the State could not 
respond, and the trial court never considered the issue. 
Appellant ’s petition, therefore, may not be construed to 
have been amended to include the erroneous jury 
instructions issue.   Moreover, bec ause “[t]he general rule 
is that an issue which was not raised in the lower court 
will not be considered on appeal,” we do not address 
Appellant ’s claim of erroneous exclusion of jury 
instructions.   Kernan v. Tanaka , 75 Haw. 1, 35, 856 P.2d ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
14 (continued  . . .) 
   e. HRPP Rule 35 motion  
 On April 24, 2001, Stanley filed a pro se HRPP Rule 35 
(1980) motion in the circuit court .14  Stanley contended his  
attempted first degree murder  sentence  was illegal because he 
should have been sentenced to  a twenty-year imprisonment, as   
HRS § 706 -610 (Supp. 1988),15 amended by Act 181, Session Laws 
(. . . continued) 
1207, 1224 (199 3) (quotation and citations omitted), cert. 
denied, 510 U.S. 1119, 114 S.Ct. 1070, 127 L.Ed.2d 389 
(1994); see also  Tax Appeal of Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc. , 
76 Hawaiʻi 1, 868 P.2d 419 (Sup.  1994). 
 
Id. (footnote omitted).  
 
14  HRPP Rule 35 (1980) states in relevant part:  
  
CORRECTION OR REDUCTION OF SENTENCE  
 The court may correct an illegal sentence at any time 
and may correct a sentence imposed in an illegal manner 
within the time provided herein for the reduction of 
sentence.  The court may redu ce a sentence within 90 days 
after the sentence is imposed, or within 90 days after 
receipt by the court of a mandate issued upon affirmance of 
the judgment or dismissal of the appeal, or within 90 days 
after entry of any order or judgment of the Supreme C ourt 
of the United States denying review of, or having the 
effect of upholding a judgment of conviction.  A motion to 
correct or reduce a sentence which is made within the time 
period aforementioned shall empower the court to act on 
such motion even though  the time period has expired.  The 
filing of a notice of appeal shall not deprive the court of 
jurisdiction to entertain a timely motion to reduce a 
sentence.  
 
15  HRS § 706 -610 states:  
 
(1)  Apart from first and second degree murder and attempted 
first and  second degree murder, felonies defined by this Code are 
classified, for the purpose of sentence, into three classes, as 
follows:  
 
   (a) Class A felonies;  
   (b) Class B felonies; and  
   (c) Class C felonies.  
  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
15 
 1987, could not apply to him  as doing so would constitute  as an 
improper ex post facto  application of law.   
On August 1 4, 2001, the circuit  court filed its order 
denying Stanley’s HRPP Rule 35 motion.  Noting the  June 6, 1987  
effective dat e of Act 181, Session Laws 1987 , and th e commission 
of Stanley’s offen ses on March 11, 1988,  the circuit  court 
determined there was no improper retroactive application of the  
sentencing statute.  Thus, the circuit  court concluded Stanley 
failed to state a colorable claim for relief, and denied  
Stanley’s HRPP Rule 35 motion as “patently frivolous and without 
a trace of support, either in the record, or from other evidence 
submitted by [Stanley].”  Stanley did not appeal the  circuit 
court’s denial of his HRPP Rule 35 motion.  
 2. Second Petition  proceedings  
  a. Circuit court proceedings  
 On March 30, 2017, sixteen years after the denial of hi s 
HRPP Rule 35 motion, Stanley filed his Second Petition , the 
subject of this certiorari proceeding, in the circuit court.   He 
argued: (1) his sentence was i llegal and against legislative 
intent because the HRS s pecifically provide s attempted  murder 
was to be treated as an ordinary class A felony subject to a 
(. . . continued) 
A felony is a class A, class B, or class C felony when it is so 
designated by this Code.  Except for first and second degree murder and 
attempted first and second degree murder, a crime declared to be a 
felony, without specification of class, is a class C felony.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
16 
 twenty-year imprisonment, and therefore, his sentence violated 
the Fifth, Eigh th, and Fourteenth Amendments to  the United 
States Constitution, as well as the Bill of Rights of the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution; (2) attempted m anslaughter, specifically        
HRS § 707 -702 (1985),16 was not a crime recognized in Hawaiʻi, 
citing to Pinero, Holbron, and Loa;17 (3) his indictment 
presented to the grand jury and petit jury, which contained 
charged offenses excessive of the “evidenced event,” was fatally 
defective; (4)  his place to keep firearm  conviction  violated the 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to  the United States 
Constitution, and article I, sections 5 and 10 of the Hawaiʻi 
Constitution, HRS § 701 -109, and HRS § 134 -6 because place to 
keep a firearm is an included offense of attempted murder, 
attempted manslaughter, and reckless endangering ; (5) the 
 
16  HRS § 707 -702 (1985) states: 
 
§707-702 Manslaughter . (1) A person commits the offense of 
manslaughter if:  
 
(a) He recklessly causes the death of another person; 
or 
(b) He intentionally causes another person to commit 
suicide.  
 
(2) In a prosecution for murder it is a defense, w hich 
reduces the offense to manslaughter, that the defendant 
was, at the time he caused the death of the other person, 
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional 
disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation. 
The reasonableness of the exp lanation shall be determined 
from the viewpoint of a person in the defendant’s situation 
under the circumstances as he believed them to be.  
 
(3) Manslaughter is a class B felony.  
 
17  These cases are further discussed in Section IV.B.1 of this opinion.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
17 
 multiple mandatory minimum terms  imposed by  the trial court 
imposed w ere “illegal, redundant, multiplicious, excessive 
and/or prejudicial” because  the jury was the trier of fact and 
“the only entity capable of determining . . . the maximum and 
minimum terms of sentence,” and therefore, the terms the trial 
court imposed violated the Fifth, Sixth, Eigh th, and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution and the Bill of 
Rights of the Hawaiʻi Constitution; (6) the errors in his case, 
whether harmless or plain, amounted to cumulative error which 
was prejudicial and required the reversal of his conviction s; 
and (7) the trial court’s denial of his August 1, 1988 motion 
for extension of time violated  the equal protection clause of 
the United State s and Hawaiʻi constitutions, as well as the 
United States Constitution’s right to effective counsel  because 
he was prejudiced by being forced to proceed with ill -prepared 
counsel.18   
 On May 9, 2017, the State untimely responded to the Second 
Petition.19  Stanley moved to strike the State’s  response  and 
 
18  Stanley served the Second Petition on the Department of the Attorney 
General, State of Hawaiʻi (“AG”) and the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney.  
The AG discussed Stanley’s grounds for relief with the Office of the 
Prosecuting Attorney; the Office of the P rosecuting Attorney stated the 
grounds for relief Stanley raised related solely to his conviction.  The AG 
agreed the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney would file a response on the 
merits, and it would not be submitting an answer.   
 
19  HRPP Rule 40(d) (2 006) required the State to respond within thirty days 
after the service of the HRPP Rule 40 petition from Stanley or within such 
further time as the court may allow.  HRPP Rule 40(d).  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
18 
 asked the circuit court to set a hearing and appo int him 
counsel.  On February 23 , 2018, the circuit court granted 
Stanley’s request to strike the State’s r esponse but denied his 
other request s.   
 On February 23, 2018, the circuit court filed its  order 
denying the Second Petition without a hearing , ruling as 
follows: (1) HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) barred Stanley’s cla im of an 
improper sentence for attempted first degree murder  because it 
was previously ruled upon by Stanley I; (2) HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) 
barred Stanley’s cl aim of erroneous attempted  reckless  
manslaughter  jury instruction  because it was not raised in h is 
2001 HRPP Rule 35 motion  and he failed to prove the existence of 
extraordinary circumstances justifying his failure to raise this 
issue, as Holbron and Loa were decided five years before Stanley 
filed his 2001 HRP P Rule 35 motion ; and (3) Stanley’s remaining 
claims, “maturing wel l before [ Stanley I ],” had been similarly 
waived due to his failure to prese nt extraordinary circumstances 
justifying  his failure to previously raise the issues and rebut 
the presumption that such failure was knowing and understanding.    
 Stanley timely appealed the circuit court’s denial of his 
Second Petition to the ICA.   
C. ICA proceedings  
 In his pro se opening brief, Stanley a rgued the circuit 
court erred , in relevant part,  by (1) determining  his claim of ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
19 
 erroneou s attempted manslaughter jur y instruction was deemed 
waived, as he instead argued his sentence was illegal because he 
was convicted of the nonexistent offense of attempted reckless 
manslaughter,  and (2) not responding to his equal protection  
clause claim.   
In response, t he State conceded Stanley stated a colorable 
claim as to his  erroneous  attempted  reckless  manslaughter  
conviction argument  as the record did not demonstrate whether 
Stanley was convicted of attempted EMED manslaughter or 
attempted reckless mansl aughter.  However, the State  argued that  
the remainder of  Stanley’s claim s was either waived or 
meritless .   
 In its August 22 , 2019 SDO , the ICA  ruled the State’s 
concession was unwarranted and  rejected Stanley’s arguments.20  
Stanley, SDO at 7, 10.  The ICA concluded  that, inter alia,  
Stanley failed to state a colorable claim that he could not have 
been convicted of attempted reckless manslaughter , noting 
 
20  The ICA also ruled: the circuit court did not fail to issue findings of 
fact and conclusions of law when denying the Second Petition; the circuit 
court did not err in ruling his claims, except for involuntary manslaughter, 
were previously ruled upon or waived because he failed to explain how his 
claims were not previously r uled upon or waived or how he proved the 
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise the 
claims in his direct appeal, HRPP Rule 35 motion, two habeas corpus petitions 
to the district court, and the First Petition; the ICA could  not address 
Stanley’s claim regarding the Motion for Production of Documents because the 
record did not contain a Motion for Production of Documents; and Stanley’s 
claim that his sentence of life without the possibility of parole for 
attempted first degre e murder violated the Eighth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution was raised and ruled upon in Stanley I .  Stanley, SDO at 
4-5, 9-10. ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
20 
 Holbron and Loa were issued more than six years after Stanley’s 
convictions .  Stanley, SDO at 5, 9.   
The ICA explained that in Holbron, this court  held “as a 
matter of law that HRS §§ 705 -500 [(1993)] and 707 -702(1)(a) 
[(1993)] do not and cannot give rise to the offense of 
‘attempted manslaughter’ under any circumstances,” overruling 
State v. Tagaro , 7 Haw. App. 291, 757 P.2d 1175 , cert. granted , 
69 Haw. 678 (1987), and cert. dismissed , 70 Haw. 666, 796 P.2d 
502 (1988).  Stanley, SDO at 5 (quoting  Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi at 
29, 904 P.2d at 914).  The ICA observed  this court  held that 
although  “there is no offense of attempted involuntary 
manslaughter premised upon the defendant attempting recklessly 
to cause the death of another person,  in violation of         
HRS §§ 705 -500 and 707-702(1)(a) (Supp. 1988) [,]” “a defendant 
may be convi cted of attempted voluntary manslaughter as a lesser 
included offense of attempted murder, in violation of         
HRS §§ 705 -500 and 707 -702(2), when the State fails to negative 
a defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) for 
which there i s a reasonable explanation.”  Stanley, SDO at 5-6 
(citing Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi at 29, 34, 43-45, 904 P.2d at 914, 
919, 928-30).   
 According to the ICA, Stanley, in his Second Petition,  
admitted he made an EME D defense  as he stated  his counsel 
requested an EMED jury instruction and the jury “rejec ted the ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
21 
 Petitioner’s  EMED defense.”  Stanley, SDO at 6.   The ICA stated 
that Stanley pointed to  his convictions of two counts of first 
degree reckless endangering  as proof his EMED defense was 
rejected by the jury and  that the jury found he acted 
recklessly , implying he was convicted for attempted involuntary 
manslaughter because Counts I and II demonstrated the jury found 
his conduct to be reckless after rejecting his EMED defense .  
Id.   
 The ICA disagreed, concluding  Stanley’s convictions of two 
counts of first degree reckless endangering  did not support a 
conclusion that he was convicted of attempted involuntary 
manslaughter in Count V.  Id.  It reasoned that although Stanley 
was convicte d on two counts of first degree reckless 
endangering , the lesser included offense of attempted first 
degree murder , he was also convicted  of attempted first degree 
murder in Count III and the lesser  included offense of attempted 
manslaughter in Count V.  Id.  Thus, the ICA concluded that 
although the jury rejected Stanley’s EMED defense in Count III 
because he could not have been convicted  of attempted first 
degree murder  if the State did not negative his  EMED defe nse, 
the jury did not reject his  EMED defen se in Count V because  he 
could only be convicted of attempted m anslaughter if the State 
failed to negative his EMED defense.  Stanley, SDO at 6 -7.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
22 
  The ICA also concluded St anley’s convictions for first 
degree reckless endangering  did not depend on  whether the jury 
accepted  his EMED defense because the jury did not consider an 
EMED defense for Counts I and II.  Stanley, SDO at 7.  The ICA 
stated consideration of an EMED defense would only arise if the 
jury believed the State proved a ll elements of attempt ed first 
degree murder  because an EMED defense mitigates murder or 
attempted murder.  Id. (citing Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi at 43, 9 04 
P.2d at 928).  It stated that if the State had proven atte mpted 
first degree murder  in Counts I and II, the jury would not 
consider the lesser included offense of  first degree  reckless  
endangering  because the outcome of the jury considering the EMED 
defense could only lead to a conviction for attempted  first 
degree murder  or attempted ma nslaughter, depending on whether 
the jury believed the State negatived Stanley’s  EMED defense.  
Id.  The ICA stated that only a failure to prove attempted  first 
degree murder  could lead to the jury considering  first degree  
reckless  endangering .  Id.  Thus, the ICA concluded the jury did 
not reject Stanley’s EMED defense in Counts I and II.  Id.  The 
ICA also stat ed Stanley’s convictions for attempted  first degree 
murder in Count III and attempted manslaughter in Count V 
demonstrated the jury may decide whet her the State negatived an 
EMED defense for each charge and was not required to apply the 
same finding as to EMED to all charges.  Id.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
23 
 The ICA ruled the State’s concession that Stanley presented 
a colorable claim  that he was convicted of attempted reckless 
manslaughter  based on Holbron and Loa was unwarranted.  Stanley, 
SDO at 7 -8.  The ICA quoted Stanley’s opening brief in Stanley 
I, in which he  argued the attempted manslaughter  jury 
instructions  were erroneous a nd confused the jur y: 
 [T]he use  of the term “recklessly” in the instruction 
would undeniably lead a layperson to conclude that the 
instruction applied to both forms of attempted 
manslaughter.  
 No rational trier of fact could be expected to 
differentiate the two forms of attempted mansla ughter and 
the different circumstances under which they were to be 
considered based upon the inst ructions in the case at bar. 
. . . 
 The jury ’s confusion is all too well illustrated by 
their repeated communications seeking clarification of 
attempted mansla ughter.  The court merely referred the jury 
to the instructions already provided, which had, of course, 
triggered the questions in the first place.  (RA: 248 -254).  
Even the verdict forms were of no assistance as they, too, 
indicated the existence of only one form of attempted 
manslaughter.  
 The defective attempted manslaughter instructions in 
their entirety rendered the jury instructions prejudicially 
erroneous and misleading, affecting substantial rights of 
Stanley at trial and depriving him of due proces s of law 
under the Hawaii and federal constitutions.  
 
Stanley, SDO at 8  (alteration and ellipsis in original) .  The 
ICA observed  Stanley I  affirmed Stanley’s conviction s, 
specifically not ed he raised the issue of “erroneous attempted 
first degree murder and attempted manslaughter instructions ,” 
and held “we discern no reversible error.”  Stanley, SDO at 9 
(citing Stanley I , mem. op. at 1 -2).  As such,  the ICA opined 
Stanley did not state a colo rable claim in this appeal based on 
an erroneous attempted manslaughter  jury instruction because the ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
24 
 issue was previously raised and ruled upon.  Id.  It further 
opined Stanley failed to state a factual basis to support a 
claim that his conviction for atte mpted manslaughter was for 
attempted involuntary manslaughte r based on reckless conduct .  
Id.  Thus, the ICA concluded Stanley failed to state a colorable 
claim that he could not have been convicted of attempted 
manslaughter and that his sentence was illeg al.  Id. 
 The ICA also ruled  Stanley did not claim his sentence for 
attempted first degree murder violated the equal protection 
clause of the United States and Hawaiʻi constitutions  in his 
Second Petition .  Stanley, SDO at 10.  The ICA stated , “[T]he 
general rule is that an issue which was not raised in the lower 
court will not be considered on appeal[.]”  Id. (alterations in 
original) (quoting Stanley II , 76 Hawaiʻi at 451, 879 P.2d at 
556).  The ICA stated  Stanley failed to prove the existence of 
extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise that 
claim in his direct appeal, two habeas corpus petitions to the 
district court, and the First Petition .  Id.  Therefore, the ICA 
concluded relief  for this clai m was unavailable under HRPP Rule 
40(a)(3).  Id. 
 
 
 
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
25 
 D. Application  for a writ of certiorari  
 Stanley presents the  following relevant  questions  on 
certiorari :21 
[1]. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals commit error by 
failing to apply obvious existing laws, rules and/or 
mandated canon to the Appellant’s appeal?  
 
[2]. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals commit error in 
failing to address in any manner the Appellant’s 
Constitutional Challenge submitted within Petition and 
appeal (See Petition S .P.P. No. 17 -1-0007 pages 18 -24) 
pertaining Equal Protection?  
 
[3]. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals commit error in 
finding Appellant can be convicted and punished for a crime 
previously determined to be not a cognizable crime in the 
State of Hawaii?  
 
[4]. Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals commit error in 
not finding exceptional circumstance pertaining the degree 
and level of the Appellant’s education at the time of the 
offenses charged against the Appellant, and the ensuing 
trial and sentence?  
 
III. Standards of review  
A. HRPP Rule 40  
 Review of orders denying HRPP Rule 40 petitions is de 
novo: 
 
 As a general rule, a hearing should be held on 
a Rule 40 petition for post -conviction relief where 
the petition states a colorable claim.  To establish 
a colorable claim, the allegations of the petition 
must show that if taken as true the facts alleged 
would change the verdict, however, a petitioner ’s 
conclusions need not be regarded as true.  Where 
examination of the record of the trial court ’s 
proceedings indicates that the petitioner ’s 
allegations show no colorable claim, it is not error 
to deny the peti tion without a hearing.   The question 
on appeal of a denial of a Rule 40 petition without a 
hearing is whether the trial record indicates that 
 
21  Stanley also presents one other question on certiorari: “ Did the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals commit error by i gnoring Grounds presented 
within the Appellant’s appeal (CAAP -18-0000141) and Petition (S.P.P. No. 17 -
1-007), and fail to respond to all of his meritorious claims? ”  We note the 
ICA did not ignore and fail to respond to Stanley’s claims; it appears the 
ICA summarized the arguments and questions Stanley presented.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
26 
 Petitioner ’s application for relief made such a 
showing of a colorable claim as to require a hearing 
before the l ower court.  
 
Dan v. State , 76 Hawaiʻi 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) 
(citation omitted).  
 
Lewi v. State , 145 Hawaiʻi 333, 345, 452 P.3d 330, 342 (2019).  
B. Sentencing  
 “The authority of a trial court to select and determine the 
severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the 
absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable 
statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed.”  
State v. Reis, 115 Hawaiʻi 79, 83-84, 165 P. 3d 980, 984 -85 (2007) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  
C. Erroneous jury instructions and nonexistent offenses  
 When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at 
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous , inconsistent, or 
misleading.  
 
 Erroneous instru ctions are presumptively 
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it 
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that 
the error was not prejudicial.   Error is not to be 
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the 
abstract.  It must be examine d in the light of the 
entire proceedings and given the effect which the 
whole record shows it to be entitled.  In that 
context, the real question becomes whether there is a 
reasonable possibility that error might have 
contributed to conviction.   If there i s such a 
reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the 
error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and 
the judgment of conviction on which it may have been 
based must be set aside.  
 
State v. Holbron , 80 Hawaiʻi 27, 32, 904 P.2d 912, 917, 
reconsideration denied , 80 Hawaiʻi 187, 907 P.2d 773 (1995) 
(citations, footnote, brackets, and quotation signals 
omitted) (emphasis in original).  
“[T]here can be no offense of ‘attempted 
manslaughter’ within the mea ning of HRS § 707 –702(1)(a)[.]”  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
27 
 Id. at 45, 904 P.2d at 930.  Thus, a jury instruction 
purporting to describe that nonexistent offense is 
erroneous.   Id. 
 
Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 350, 926 P.2d at 1273  (alterations in 
original) . 
IV. Discussion  
A. HRPP Rule 40 principles  
We begin our analysis with the ICA’s ruling that Stanley 
failed to state a colorable claim that his sentence for Count V 
was illegal.  The ICA concluded that in addition to failing to 
state a factual basis  that he was convicted of attempted 
reckless manslaughte r, he previously raised and Stanley I  ruled 
upon the issue of erroneous attempted manslaughter jury 
instructions.  This issue  requires us to examine HRPP Rule 40.  
We begin with its plain language .  
HRPP Rule 40 (a)(1) states  in relevant part:  
(1) From Judgment .  At any time but not prior to final 
judgment , any person may seek relief under the procedure 
set forth in this rule from the judgment of conviction, on 
the following grounds:  
 
(i) that the judgment was obtained or sen tence 
imposed in violation of the constitution of the United 
States or of the State of Hawaiʻi;  
(ii) that the court which rendered the judgment was 
without jurisdiction over the person or the subject matter;  
(iii) that the sentence is illegal;  
(iv) that there is newly discovered evidence; or  
(v) any ground which is a basis for collateral attack 
on the judgment.  
 
(Emphasis added.)  
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) , which governs w aiver of issues  in a 
HRPP Rule 40 proceeding , states:  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
28 
 (3) Inapplicability .  Rule 40 proceedings shall not be 
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where 
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled 
upon or were waived.   Except for a claim of illegal 
sentence , an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly 
and understandingly failed to raise it and it could have 
been raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a 
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually 
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually i nitiated 
under this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the 
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the 
petitioner ’s failure to raise the issue .  There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or 
to raise an issue i s a knowing and understanding failure.  
 
(Emphasis added.)   In turn,  HRPP Rule 40(f) provides that  “[i]f 
a petition alleges facts that if proven would entitle the 
petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a hearing which may 
extend only to the issues rais ed in the petition or answer [,]” 
but “the court may deny a hearing if the petitioner’s claim is 
patently frivolous and is without trace of support either in the 
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner .” 
Thus, the plain language of HRPP Rule 40 allows a 
petitioner to bring a claim of  illegal sentence “[a]t any time 
but not prior to final judgment ,” even if the petitioner had  not 
raised a claim of  illegal sentence  in a previous petition  and 
failed to show  extraordinary circumstances justifying their 
failure to do so .  In Akau v. State , 144 Hawaiʻi 159, 439 P.3d 
111 (2019),  we held the doctrine of laches did not apply in the 
context of HRPP Rule 40 proceedings,  observing HRPP Rule 40 
lacked a statute of limitations for bringing post-conviction 
petitions .  144 Hawaiʻi at 162, 439 P.3d at 114.  We declined to ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
29 
 impose “a kind of ju dicially -crafted statute of limitations on 
Rule 40 petitions seeking relief from a judgment of conviction 
when that rule as promulgated explicitly states that such 
petitions may be brought ‘[a]t any time’ so long as they are not 
brought ‘prior to final jud gment[.] ’”  Id. (alterations in 
original) (quoting HRPP Rule 40(a)(1)) (citing HRPP Rule 
40(a)(2)).  We opined the lack of a statute of limitations 
appeared to be deliberate, as the drafters of HRPP Rule 40 
rejected using an Illinois statute as a template for a statute 
of limitations on post -conviction petitions.  Id. (citing Comm. 
For Penal Rules Revision of th e Judicial Council of Haw., 
Proposed Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure  at 206 (June 1985)) .  
Thus, put simply, HRPP Rule 40 allow s a petitioner to bring 
a claim of illegal sentence  “[a]t any time ” after final 
judgment,  even if the y failed to raise the illegal sentence 
claim in a previous petition ; if the petitioner states a 
colorable claim, they are entitled to a hearing under HRPP Rule 
40(f).  See Flubacher v. State , 142 Hawaiʻi 109, 114 n.7, 414 
P.3d 161, 166 n.7 (2018) (“ [A]ny analysis of waiver must be made 
in light of HRPP Rule 40(a)(3), which specifically exempts 
illegal sentence claims from being waived. ”).  With the 
foregoing principles in mind, we now turn to Stanley’s 
contentions on certiorari . ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
30 
 B. The record does not dem onstrate Stanley was convicted of 
attempted EMED manslaughter ; if he was convicted of 
attempted reckless manslaughter, he was subject to an 
illegal sentence for a non -existent crime and the 
presumptively harmful erroneous attempted reckless 
manslaughter jury instruction was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt  
  
Stanley maintains he was convicted of  the nonexistent 
offense of  attempted reckless manslaughter.  If this is true, he 
would have been subject to an illegal sentence  under HRPP Rule 
40(a)(3)  because a sentence  for a crime that does not exist is 
an illegal sentence  in Hawaiʻi.  We begin our analysis by 
discussing  the history of the nonexistent offense of attempted 
reckless manslaughter . 
1. The history of the nonexistent offense  of attempted 
reckless manslaughter  in Hawaiʻi 
 
  a. Pinero 
While Stanley’s 1988 direct appeal was pending, this court 
issued Pinero on July 25, 1989, approximately five months before 
this court decided Stanley I .  In Pinero, the trial court 
instructed the  jury as follows:  
In this case, you must first determine whe ther the 
Defendant is guilty or not guilty of Murder in the First 
Degree.  If you find that the offense of Murder in the 
First Degree has not been proved from the evidence beyond a 
reasonable doubt, you may then consider whether the 
Defendant is guilty or not guilty of the lesser included 
offense of Manslaughter.  
A person commits the offense of Manslaughter if he 
recklessly causes the death of another person; or in a 
prosecution for murder it is a defense, which reduces the 
offense to Manslaughter, that the  defendant was, at the 
time he caused the death of the other person, under the 
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for 
which there is a reasonable explanation.  The ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
31 
 reasonableness of the explanation shall be determined from 
the viewpoint o f a person in the defendant ’s situation 
under the circumstances as he believed them to be.  
 
70 Haw. at 515, 778 P.2d at 709.  During its deliberations, the 
jury asked the trial court for a “legal definition of the 
elements of the lesser charge of manslaugh ter” and the trial 
court responded by referring the jury to the foregoing 
instruction s.  70 Haw. at 516, 778 P.2d at 709.  The jury 
convicted the defendant of, inter alia, first degree murder  and 
the defendant appealed.  70 Haw. at 51 2, 778 P.2d at 70 7. 
 This court vacated the defendant’s conviction, holding the 
trial court erred because it  
instruct[ed] . . . the jury to first consider whether or 
not the defendant was guilty of the charged offense  and if 
it found the offense had not been proved, to then proceed 
to the lesser offense.  “If [a lesser -included offense] 
instruction is given, it is customary to tell the jury to 
consider first the greater offense, and to move on to 
consideration of the l esser offense only if they have some 
reasonable doubt as to guilt of the greater offense.”  
The trial court’s error here was one of omission; it 
failed to fully explain the significance of HRS § 707 -
702(2) and to guide the jury in its consideration of the 
mitigating defense.  The lesser -included offense 
instruction may well have had an effect of precluding 
consideration of possibly extenuating circumstances during 
deliberations on the charge of murder in the first degree.  
 
70 Haw. at 524 -25, 778 P.2d at 714 (citations omitted) ( second 
alteration in original).   
This court distinguished HRS § 707 -702(2) from           
HRS § 707 -702(1)(a), stating the provisions of manslaughter as 
defined by HRS § 707 -702(1)(a) “may be established by the same 
or less than all t he facts required to prove murder; and this 
renders it a lesser included offense of murder.”  70 Haw. at ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
32 
 523, 778 P.2d at 713.  However, this court stated the provisions 
of HRS § 707 -702(2) did not describe manslaughter as a lesser 
included offense of murd er, but instead served “to reduce murder 
to manslaughter ‘when mitigating mental or emotional 
disturbances are present.’”  70 Haw. at 523, 778 P.2d at 714.  
This court stated HRS § 707 -702(2) was “more accurately the 
mitigating defense,” as it has been cha racterized as “voluntary 
manslaughter [because it] involves the intentional [or knowing] 
killing of another while under the influence of a reasonably 
induced [extreme mental or] emotional disturbance . . . causing 
a temporary loss of normal self -control.”  70 Haw. at 523 -24, 
778 P.2d at 714 (alterations and ellipsis in original).  
Although Pinero did not reach the question of whether attempted 
reckless manslaughter was a recognized offense in Hawaiʻi, 
implicit in its holding was that “the only non-exculpatory 
circumstance that the [ Hawaiʻi Penal Code] recognizes as being 
legally capable of ‘mitigating’ murder to manslaughter is the 
‘mitigation’ of ‘extreme mental or emotional disturbance for 
which the re is a reasonable explanation’ as set forth in      
HRS § 707 -702(2).”  Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi at 45, 904 P.2d at 930 
(citing Pinero, 70 Haw. at 523 -24, 778 P.2d at 714).   
 b. Holbron 
 A year after Pinero, we issued Holbron, in which we 
discussed the “offen se” of attempted reckless manslaughter.  80 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
33 
 Hawaiʻi at 44-45, 904 P.2d at 929 -30.  In Holbron, the State 
charged the defendant with attempted second degree murder.  80 
Hawaiʻi at 30, 904 P.2d at 915.  Defense counsel objected to the 
instruction of the “inc luded offense” of “Attempted Manslaughter 
(Reckless conduct),” which the trial court denied.  80 Hawaiʻi at 
31, 904 P.2d at 916.  At the conclusion of the parties’ final 
arguments, the trial court instructed the jury that “if it was 
‘unable to agree that t he [prosecution] has proven beyond a 
reasonable doubt’ that [ the defendant ] had committed the offense 
of Attempted Murder, the jury could then go on to consider the 
lesser included offense of ‘Attempted Manslaughter (Reckless 
Conduct).’”  80 Hawaiʻi at 46, 904 P.2d at 931  (first alteration 
in original) .  The jury convicted the defendant  of the charged 
offense of attempted second degree murder and he appealed.  80 
Hawaiʻi at 32, 904 P.2d at 917.  
After discussi ng voluntary and involuntary manslaughter,  
this court unequivocally held there could be no attempt to 
commit involuntary manslaughter, and therefore, there is no 
offense of attempted reckless manslaughter.22  80 Hawaiʻi at 33-
45, 904 P.2d at 918 -30.  As such, this court held the attempted 
 
22  In holding there was no offense of attempted reckless manslaughter, 
Holbron overruled Tagaro, in which the ICA held that under the circumstances 
of that case, attempted reckless manslaughter was an included offense of 
attempted murder, and that the trial court was required to sua sponte  
instruct the jury it could find the defendant guilty of atte mpted reckless 
manslaughter if it did not find him guilty of attempted murder.  80 Hawaiʻi at 
47, 904 P.2d at 932.  ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
34 
 reckless  manslaughter jury instruction was erroneous  as it 
described a nonexistent offense .  80 Hawaiʻi at 43, 904 P.2d at 
928.  However, invoking  the presumption that jurors are 
reasonable and generally follow the instructions given, this 
court concluded  that bec ause “the jury could not have reached, 
much less considered, the disputed instruction that erroneously 
described a nonexistent offense, there is no ‘reasonable 
possibility that [the]  error might have contributed to [the 
defendant’s] conviction. ”  80 Hawaiʻi at 46-47, 904 P.2d at 9 31-
32 (first alteration in original).  As such, we held the 
erroneous attempted reckless  manslaughter  jury instruction 
harmless  beyond a reasonable doubt and  affirmed the defendant ’s 
attempted second degree murder conviction.   Id.    
 c. Loa 
 Approximately a year later after Holbron, we issued Loa.  
In Loa, the State charged the defen dant with, inter alia, 
attempted first degree murder.  83 Hawaiʻi at 339, 926 P.2d at 
1262.  The trial court instructed the jury, inter alia, as 
follows:  
 If and only if you find [ the defendant ] not guilty of 
Attempted Murder in the First Degree, or you are unable to 
reach a unanimous verdict as to the offense of Attempted 
Murder in the First Degree, then you must determine whether 
[the defendant] is guilty or not guilty of the lesser 
included offense of Attempted Manslaughter.  
 A person commits the offense of Attempted 
Manslaughter if he intentionally engages in conduct 
intended or known to recklessly cause the death of another 
person. ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
35 
 There are two elements to the offense of Attempted 
Manslaughter, each of which must be proven by the 
prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt.  The two elements 
are: 
1. That [the defendant ] intentionally engaged in a 
course of conduct; and  
2. That [the defendant ] consciously disregarded a 
substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct would 
be intended or known to recklessly cause the deaths of [the 
complainant] and [her male companion].  
 
83 Hawaiʻi at 344, 926 P.2d at 1267 ( last two  alterations in 
original).  The trial court also instructed the jury with 
respect to first degree assault and second degree reckless 
endangering as additional offenses included within attempted 
first degree murder.  83 Hawaiʻi at 359, 926 P.2d at 1282.  
During its deliberations, the jury transmitted a written 
communication to the trial court, asking:  
 What do we do now on Count I, Attempted Murder in the 
First Degree?  We are unable to reach a unanimous decision.  
Do we now have to consider Attempted Mansla ughter or are we 
deadlocked and stop deliberating on Count I?  Some jurors 
are not willing to settle for a lesser charge.  
 
83 Hawaiʻi at 343-44, 926 P.2d at 1266 -67.  With the concurrence 
of counsel, the trial court responded, “Please reread the 
attached i nstructions,” and furnished the jury with the 
foregoing instructions i n writing .  83 Hawaiʻi at 344, 926 P.2d 
at 1267.  The jury convicted the defendant  of, inter alia, 
“‘attempted reckless manslaughter’ (as a supposedly included 
offense of the charged off ense of attempted murder in the first 
degree).”  83 Hawaiʻi at 339, 926 P.2d at 1262.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
36 
  This court  held the trial court plainly erred in 
instructing the jury it could convict the defendant  of the 
nonexistent offense of attempted reckless manslaughter, and  it 
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because it was the 
sole basis of the defendant’s  attempted reckless manslaughter  
conviction.  83 Hawaiʻi at 357, 926 P.2d at 1280.  This court  
stated, “It is self -evident that, being non -existent, attempted 
reckless manslaughter cannot be ‘included ’ within attempted 
first degree murder[.]”  83 Hawaiʻi at 358, 926 P.2d at 1281.  
This court  further stated that “ the giving of such an erroneous 
instruction constitutes plain error as a matter of law when 
‘there is a reasonable possibility that [the instruction] might 
have contributed to conviction, ’ because the error ‘seriously 
affect[s] the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of [the] 
judicial proceedings. ’”  Id. (alterations in original) (citation 
omitted).   
This court  rejected the State’s suggestion that the 
erroneous attempted reckless manslaughter jury instruction 
“obviously benefitted” the defendant beca use the only 
alternative was to convict him of attempted first degree murder.  
83 Hawaiʻi at 359, 926 P.2d at 1282.  Invoking the presumption 
that jurors are reasonable and generally follow the instructions 
given, this court  stated the  fact that the  jury reached the 
erroneous jury instruction at all  signified  the jury was unable ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
37 
 to convict the defendant of attempted first degree murder.  Id.  
Moreover, this court  noted that although  the trial court had 
also instructed the jury to the other lesser included offenses 
of first degree assault and second degree reckless endangering , 
“subsumed within these instructions was a directive that the 
jury could not consider these included offenses  if it convicted 
[the defendant]  of attempted reckless manslaughter.”  Id.  As 
such, the jury’s conviction based on the erroneous attempted 
manslaughter jury instruction precluded it from reaching the 
other lesser included offenses.  Id.  This court  stated that “in 
the absence of the erroneous instruction, the jury may have 
acquitted [the defendant] altogether in connection with the 
attempted first degree murder charge.  However compelling the 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing might have been, such a 
possibil ity cannot be dismissed absolutely.”  Id. (footnote 
omitted).  
This court  held the erroneous attempted reckless 
manslaughter jury instruction  was “presumptively harmful” and 
“necessarily contributed to [the defendant’s] conviction of the 
nonexistent offense  of attempted reckless manslaughter. ”  Id.  
This court stated that “[o]bviously, in absence of the erroneous 
instruction, [the defendant ] could not  have been so 
convicted [,]” which “seriously affect[ed] the fairness [and] ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
38 
 integrity . . . of [the] judicial proceedings.”  Id.  (last 
three alterations and ellipsis in original).   
2. The erroneous attempted reckless manslaughter jury 
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonab le doubt  
 
With the principles of Pinero, Holbron, and Loa in mind, we  
now turn to this case .  The ICA gave two bases for rejecting 
Stanley’s attempted reckless manslaughter conviction  argument:  
(1) Stanley previously raised this argument which was ruled upon 
in Stanley I  and (2) he failed to state a factual basis to 
support his claim that he was convicted of attempted reckless 
manslaughter.  After reviewing the jury instructions, verdict 
forms, and t he record  as a whole , we hold  Stanley stated a 
colorable claim as to  his attempted manslaughter convictio n in 
Count V. 
As to the ICA’s first basis  for rejecting Stanley’s 
attempted reckless manslaughter argument , the ICA concluded that 
Stanley did not state a colorable claim of erroneous attempted 
manslaughter jury instruction in the instant appeal because he  
previously raised the issue of “erroneou s attempted first degree 
murder and attempted manslaughter instructions” and  Stanley I  
held “we discern no discernible error. ”  Stanley I , mem. op. at 
1-2.  As the ICA noted, Stanley previously  argued that these 
jury instructions  were erroneous  and confusing.   However,  he did 
not argue, as he does here, that his sentence  was illegal ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
39 (continued  . . .) 
 because it was based on a crime that does not exist.  Indeed, 
Stanley’s  1988 direct appeal and our previous  decision  
predate Holbron and Loa.  Accordingly,  we hold that this court 
has not previously  ruled upon the issue in this case and Stanley 
is not barred from Rule 40 relief under HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)  on 
this issue. 
As to the ICA’s second basis for rejecting Stanley’s 
attempted reckless manslaughter jury conviction  argument , the 
ICA incorrectly concluded Stanley failed to state a colorable 
claim that his conviction in Count V was for attempted reckless 
manslaughter .  Because the record does not demonstrate Stanley 
was convicted of  attempted manslaughter based on the mitigating 
defense of EMED,  “the only non-exculpatory circumstance legally 
capable of mitigating murder to manslaughter ,” we hold Stanley 
stated a colorable claim that he was convicted of attempted 
reckless manslaughter.23 
 
23  For the same reasons, we note that in its February 23, 2018 order  
denying the Second Petition without a hearing,  the circuit court erroneo usly 
concluded  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) barred Stanley’s claim of erroneous attempted 
manslaughter jury instruction becaus e Stanley failed to prove  the existence 
of extraordinary circumstances justifying his failure to raise this issue , as 
Holbron and Loa were decided five years before his 2001 HRPP Rule 35 motion.  
As Stanley argued, the circuit court appeared to misconstrue the arguments 
presented in his almost -eighty-pages pro se Second Petition, as Stanley had 
also argued he was convicted of the nonexistent o ffense of attempted reckless 
manslaughter.  See Villaver v. Sylva , 145 Hawaiʻi 29, 36, 445 P.3d 701, 708 
(2019) (explaining that, in the context of pro se pleadings, “[a] fundamental 
tenet of Hawaiʻi law is that ‘[p]leadings prepared by pro se litigants sh ould 
be interpreted liberally[,]’” and that “[t]he underpinnings of this tenet 
rest on the promotion of equal access to justice”) (alterations in original) 
(citation omitted); see also  Bryant, 6 Haw. App. at 335, 720 P.2d at 1019 
(“Although the [HRPP Rule 40] Petition did not specify as a ground for relief ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
40 
 As stated above,  
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful 
and are a gr ound for reversal unless it affirmatively 
appears from the record as a whole that the error was not 
prejudicial.   Error is not to be viewed in isolation and 
considered purely in the abstract.  It must be examined in 
the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect 
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.  In that 
context, the real question becomes whether there is a 
reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to 
conviction.   If there is such a reasonable possibility in a 
criminal  case, then the error is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which 
it may have been based must be set aside.  
 
Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 350, 926 P.2d at 1273.   
Here, the trial court instructed the jury as follows:  
If you are unable to find that the offense of 
attempted murder in the first degree or second degree has 
been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, you may then 
consider  whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of 
the included offense of attempted manslaughter. 
In a prosecution for attempted murder in the first 
degree or second degree, attempted manslaughter is an 
included offense.  The offense of attempted manslaughter is 
committed if the defendant attempted to recklessly cause 
the death of another person. 
In a prosecution for attempted murder in the first 
degree or second degree, it is also a defense, which 
reduces the offense to attempted manslaughter, that the 
defendant was, at the time he attempted to cause the death 
of another person, under the influence of extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable 
explanation.  The reasonable -ness of the explanation shall 
be determined from the viewpoint of a person in the 
defendant’s situation under the circumstances as he 
believed  them to be.  
The burden is upon the State to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant was not acting under 
the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance 
for which there is a reasonable explanation.  If the State 
has not done so, you must find the defendant guilty of the 
included offense of attempted manslaughter.  If the  State 
has done so, you must find the defendant guilty of the 
offense of attempted murder in the first degree or second 
degree. 
(. . . continued) 
the precise factual basis upon which the circuit court ruled, it must be 
borne in mind that Defendant was pro se when he filed the Petition and should 
not suffer for his inability to articulate his claim. ”).   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
41 
  
(Emphasis added.)  
When, based on the entirety of the record, there is a 
reasonable possibility that a defendant was convicted of a non -
existent offense, the judgment of conviction must be set aside.   
The trial court ’s erroneous attempted reckless manslaughter jury 
instruction was “presumptively harmful ” because it  described  the 
nonexistent offense  of attempted reckless manslaughter , and such 
an instruction “[is] a ground for reversal unless it 
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error 
was not prejudicial .”24  See Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 350, 926 P.2d at 
1273.  The critical inquiry , then, is whether the  attempted 
reckless manslaughter jury instruction  “necessarily contributed 
to [Stanley’s] conviction of the nonexistent offense of 
attempted reckless manslaughter .”  Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 359, 926 
P.2d at 1282.  
Unlike in Holbron and like in Loa, here, t he record 
demonstrates  the jury reached the erroneous attempted reckless 
manslaughter jury instruction  as evidenced by its  transmitted  
written communications to the trial court asking for 
 
24  We note the trial court’s jury instructions concerning when the jury 
could consider the mitigating EMED defense were erroneous, as they “may well 
have had an effect of precluding consideration of possibly extenuating 
circumstances during deliberat ions on the charge of [attempted] murder in the 
first [and second] degree.”  Pinero, 70 Haw. at 525, 778 P.2d at 714; see 
also Holbron, 80 Hawaiʻi at 45, 904 P.2d at 930; Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 358, 926 
P.2d at 1281.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
42 
 clarification on attempted reckless manslaughter , as well as its 
verdict form  finding Stanley guilty of attempted manslaughter  in 
Count V.  The question then turns to whether  there was a 
reasonable probability  the jury convicted  Stanley of attempted 
reckless  manslaughter .  Although the State conceded Stanley 
stated a colorable c laim because the record did not demonstrate 
whether Stanley was convicted of attempted EMED manslaughter, 
the ICA concluded the State’s concession was unwarranted because 
“the jury did not reject the EMED defense when Stanley was 
convicted of Attempted Manslau ghter in Count V because he could 
only be convicted of Attempted Manslaughter if the State failed 
to negative his EMED defense.”  Stanley, SDO at 6 -7.  For the 
reasons discussed below, the ICA’s analysis is flawed.    
The record does not support the ICA’s c onclusion .  First, 
the jury’s  Count V verdict form , which only shows a conviction 
of “Attempted Manslaughter,”  is ambiguous as to whether it was 
based on  attempted reckless manslaughter or attempted EMED 
manslaughter.   See State v. Lincoln , 3 Haw. App. 107, 122, 643 
P.2d 807, 818 (App. 1982), superseded in part by statute as 
stated in  Briones, 74 Haw. at 456 n.7, 848 P.2d at 973 n.7  
(looking to the jury’s verdict forms to resolve alleged 
inconsistency in jury instructions and resulting verdicts).   
Second, t he jury’s transmitted written communications to the 
trial court  asking for clarification as to attempted reckless ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
43 
 manslaughter  show the jury’s confusion as to attempted reckless 
manslaughter .25  Third, the structure of the trial court’s  jury 
instructions  prejudiced Stanley as they  misled the jury .  It 
appears the ICA , noting Stanley admitted  he made an EMED defense  
that the jury rejected , relied on the  trial court’s attempted 
EMED manslaughter jury instruction , which came after the 
attempted reckless manslaughter jury instruction,  to conclude 
the jury did not reject Stanley’s EMED defense .  However, there 
is a reasonable possibility the jury, having found Stanley 
guilty of attempted reckless manslaughter, did not  move on to  
consider the attempted EMED manslaughter jury instruction .  
Further, because the trial court instructed the jury to also 
consider  first degree reckless endangering in Count V, it could 
have been possible for the jury to find Stanley not guilty of 
that charge as well, thereby acquitting Stanley of attempted 
second degree murder.  “However, subsumed within these 
instructions was a directive that the jury could not consider 
these included offenses if it convicted [Stanley]  of attempted 
reckless manslaughter.  The jury ’s guilty verdict thus precluded 
it from reaching them [.]”  Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 359, 926 P.2d at 
1282.  “The jury may have acquitted [Stanley] altogether in 
connection with the attempted [second] degree murder charge.  
 
25  Indeed, the State admitted it appeared the jury was confused as to what 
attempted manslaughter and attempted reckless manslaughter entailed.  See 
supra note 9.   ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
44 (continued  . . .) 
 However compelling the evidence of criminal wrongdoing might 
have been, such a possibility cannot be dismi ssed absolutely.”   
Id. (footnote omitted).  
Because of the lack of evidence in the record demonstrating 
Stanley was convicted of attempted EMED manslaughter, there is a 
reasonable possibility that the jury may have convicted Stanley 
of the nonexistent offen se of attempted reckless manslaughter .  
Therefore, the erroneous attempted reckless manslaughter jury 
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt .  This 
requires us to vacate his attempted manslaughter conviction and 
remand to the circuit court  for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion .26 
 
26  On remand, double jeopardy principles preclude Stanley from being 
retried for attempted seco nd degree murder in Count V.  See Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 
360, 926 P.2d at 1283  (holding the defendant cannot be retried on the 
original charge of attempted first degree murder because he was convicted of 
the “included offense” of the nonexistent offense of att empted reckless 
manslaughter, as doing so would violate HRS § 701 -110(1) (1993), the 
defendant’s constitutional right against double jeopardy, and State v. 
Feliciano , 62 Haw. 637, 618 P.2d 306 (1980)).  Here, t he trial court 
instructed the jury that “[i] f you are unable to find that the offense of 
Attempted Murder in the First Degree or Second Degree has been proven beyond 
a reasonable doubt, you may then consider  whether the Defendant is guilty or 
not guilty of the included offense of Attempted Manslaughte r.”  The jury’s 
written communications  asking for clarification as to attempted reckless 
manslaughter  are significant in light of “the sound presumption of appellate 
practice that jurors are reasonable and generally follow the instructions 
that they are gi ven.”  Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi at 359, 926 P.2d at 1282.   
 
We presume that the jury followed the [trial] court's 
instructions and first considered the evidence with regard 
to the Attempted Murder charge.  Consequently, the jury 
would first have considered the charged offense and would 
have gone on to consider any lesser offense only if [it 
was] unable to agree that the prosecution had proven that 
[Stanley] was guilty of the charged offense beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  
 ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
45 
 C. Stanley did not  claim his sentence  for attempted first 
degree murder  violates  the equal protection clause of  the 
United States or Hawaiʻi constitutio ns 
 
Stanley m aintains that his sentence for  attempted first 
degree murder violates the equal protection clause of the United 
States and Hawaiʻi constitutions  because Hawaiʻi’s first degree 
murder statute affords greater protection to  judges, 
prosecutors, and police officers or it is not applied equally , 
and argues the ICA erred in failing to address that claim.   As 
the ICA concluded, Stanley’s failure to raise this argument in 
the circuit court an d failure to prove the existence of 
extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise this 
argument in his direct appeal, two habeas corpus petitions to 
the district court, and the First Petition  bar relief under HRPP 
Rule 40(a)(3). 
D. The record is insufficient to address Stanley’s remaining 
claim 
 
 The record is insufficient to address Stanley’s remaining 
claim on certiorari, namely whether the ICA erred in not finding 
exceptional circumstances existed because of the degree and 
level of his education at the time of his offenses and trial.    
(. . . continued) 
Id.  “Thus, the fact that the  jury reached the erroneous  [attempted reckless 
manslaughter jury]  instruction at all signifies it was unable to convict 
[Stanley] of attempted [second] degree murder.”  Id.  “The jury having 
acquitted [Stanley] of [attempted second degree murder] by virtu e of its 
verdict, we hold that [Stanley] may not be retried for it.”  Loa, 83 Hawaiʻi 
at 361, 926 P.2d at 12 84. ***    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    ***  
 
46 
 V. Conclusion  
 For the reasons explained above, we va cate the ICA’s 
October 2, 2019  judgment on appeal, the circuit court’s February 
23, 2018  order denying the  Second Petition,  and Stanley’s 
conviction of attempted manslaughter a nd the ten -year sentence 
that flowed from it .  We remand this case to the circuit court 
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.    
Edward G. Stanley,
petitioner pro se    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Trish K. Morikawa       
Sonja P. McCullen,
(on the briefs), 
for respondent    
  
      
 
      
 
