***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff -Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
WILLIAM MCDONNELL, Petitioner/Defendant -Appellant .  
  
 
SCWC-14-0000355 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-14-0000355; FC-CR. NO. 13-1-0002) 
 
AUGUST 28, 2017 
 
DISSENTING OPINION BY POLLACK, J.,  
IN WHICH WILSON, J., JOINS  
The State’s expert witness, who testified  “in the 
dynamics of child sex ual abuse,” informed the jury that a 
prerequisite to obtaining his Ph.D. was completion of his 
dissertation .  This dissertation , noted the expert,  compared a 
group of convicted child molesters to non -child molesters to 
distinguish traits “child molesters have that normal men don’t 
have.”  The expert told the jury that child molesters are Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000355
28-AUG-2017
08:35 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 2 defined by their behaviors  and that the typical child abuser 
lives in the child’s home as part of a familial relationship ; 
has a pre -existing , non-sexual relationship with the child ; 
initially  begins a healthy touching relationship with the child 
in advance of the sexual conduct ; frequently  commits the sexual 
abuse in the molester’s home; commonly  engages in the sexal 
abuse with others present in the home ; often commit s the sexual 
abuse when the child  is asleep in bed ; does not use physical 
force in  perpetrating the abuse;  and usually obtains sexual 
contact from the child in exchange for gifts or benefits . 
  All of these behaviors  and characteristics of the 
typical child molester , as described  by the expert , matched the 
allegations  made by the child in this case .  The majority 
concludes that the expert’s testimony , which provided a template 
for the jury to evaluate and compare the child ’s allegations,  
was not profile evidence  and was admissible  as proferred by the 
State.  I believe that this conclusion is incorrect and that the  
evidence as it was admitted by the family court was unfairly and 
overly prejudicial.  
  Additionally, when  the defense  challenge d the expert 
testimony  in this case , the family court  declined to evaluate 
the probat ive value of the evidence against  its unfair 
prejudicial effect  as required by Hawaii law.  Instead, the 
family court applied a categorical rule that the evidence was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 3 admissible based on its misunderstanding of this court’s 
decision in State v. Batangan , 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48 (1990) .  
However, Batangan  and the Hawaii Rules of Evidence  require the 
exercise of judicial discretion  in assessing the admissibility 
of such evidence , and, as noted by many courts, the existence of 
discretion requires its exercise.   By failing to apply it s 
discretion  in this case , the family court prejudicially deprived 
the defendant to what he was statutorily entitled --a reasoned 
exercise of judicial discretion as to whether all or part  of the 
expert’s testimony should have been excluded.  I would therefore 
hold that the family court prejudicially erred in failing to 
exercise its independent judgment as to whether to admit or 
exclude all or part of the expert testimony in this case . 
  I also disagree with  the majority’s unwarranted 
expansion of the ruling of this court in Batangan , 71 Haw. 552, 
799 P.2d 48 .  The Batangan  court did not contemplate the type of 
evidence  presented in this case.  The expert psychological 
testimony that the court sanctioned  in Batangan  pertained to the 
behavior of child victims of sexual abuse , which testimony the 
court determined was relevant and helpful to the jury in 
assessing the credibility of the child complainant in that case.   
71 Haw. at 557-58, 799 P.2d at 51 -52.  Evidence that assists the 
jury in assessing a child witness’s credibility must be 
distinguished from evidence that  involves testimony regarding ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 4 patterns of behavior or characteristics of a “typical molester ,” 
which was admitted against the defendant in this case.  The 
Batangan  court cautioned that a ny decision with respect to the 
admissibility of expert psychological testimony  must be 
addressed with great care so as not to admit expert testimony 
that usurps th e basic function of the jury, unduly influences 
the trier of fact, fails to  meaningfully assist the jury , or 
does not make a fact of consequence to the proceedings more or 
less probable .  Id. at 558, 562, 799 P.2d at 52, 54.   Because 
the majority’s decisio n in this case permits the admission of 
expert testimony  contrary to these fundamental considerations  
and as evidence of a defendant’s guilt, I also dissent for this 
reason. 
I. The Family Court Did Not Make a “Judgment Call” Regarding the 
Admissibility of the Challenged Evidence  
  Over the defense’s objection that the proffered expert 
testimony was unfairly prejudicial, t he family court admitted 
the expert testimony ,  reasoning, “It’s already been ruled by 
the Supreme Court, our very own Supreme Court in [ Batangan] that 
it’s admissible because Dr. Bivens’ testimony is relevant and 
assist[s] the jury on this new found phenomena of child a buse.”  
But this was not the ruling in Batangan , and, in fact,  Batangan  
expressly  required the family court to consider unfair prejudice 
in determining the admissibility of the expert testimony under ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 5 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 403 .1  71 Haw. at 558, 799 
P.2d at 52 . 
  In Batangan , this court considered the ad missibility 
of expert testimony  regarding the behavior of child victims of 
sexual abuse that may undermine a child witness’s credibility .  
71 Haw. at 555, 799 P.2d at 50.   Batangan  explained that “the 
common experience of a jury, in most cases, provides a 
sufficient basis for assessment of a witness’ credibility, ” and 
thus, the court observed, “expert testimony on a witness’ 
credibility is inappropriate.”  Id. at 556-57, 799 P.2d at 51.  
Nonetheless, the court recognized that child victims of sexual 
abuse exhibit behavior that, although normal, may be inter preted 
by the jury as a sign that the child witness is not being 
truthful .  Id. at 557-58, 799 P.2d at 51 -52.  The behavior 
discussed by the court in Batangan  involved delayed reporting of 
the offenses and recantation of allegations of abuse .  Id.  The 
                                                        
 1 The Hawaii Rules of Evidence were adopted by the legislature and 
set forth in chapter 626 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes to “codify the law of 
evidence, to promote informed judicial rulings on evidence points, and to 
achieve uniformity in the treatment of evidence among the courts of this 
State.”  HRE Ru le 100 cmt. (1993).  
HRE Rule 403 specifies when relevant evidence may be excluded from 
admission:  
 Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or  misleading 
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of 
time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.  
HRE Rule 403 (1993).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 6 court noted that such behavior would normally “be attributed to 
inaccuracy or prevarication.”  Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51.  “In 
these situations,” the court concluded, “it is helpful for the 
jury to know that many child victims of sexual abuse behave in 
the same manner ” when assessing the child witness’s credibility.   
Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 52.  
  Although  Batangan  recognized that expert testimony 
regarding the behavior of child victims of sex ual abuse that 
undermine the child witness’s credibility may be admitted under 
HRE Rule 702,2 id. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52, such evidence  is not 
indiscriminately admissible .  Rather, testimony of this nature  
remains subject to the applicable requirements of the Hawaii 
Rules of Evidence, including  HRE Rules 702, 401, and 403.  Id. 
at 562, 799 P.2d at 54.   Indeed, recognizing “that even this 
type of expert testimony carries the potential of bolstering the 
credibility of one witness and conversely refuting t he 
credibility of another,” Batangan  advised that “[c] ourts must 
                                                        
 2 HRE Rule 702 provides the following:  
 If scientific, technical, or other specialized 
knowledge will assist th e trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness 
qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, 
training, or education may testify thereto in the form of 
an opinion or otherwise.  In determining the issue of 
assistance to the trier of fact, the court may consider the 
trustworthiness and validity of the scientific technique or 
mode of analysis employed by the proffered expert.  
HRE Rule 702 (1993).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 7 proceed with caution in admitting expert testimony in these 
cases.”  Id. at 558, 562, 799 P.2d at 52 , 53-54.  The Batangan  
court noted that , in evaluating such testimony  under HRE Rule 
702, the trial court must find  that the witness is an expert, 
the testi mony is relevant, the testimony will assist the jury in 
comprehending something not commonly known or understood, and 
the testimony does not include opinions that “in effect usurp 
the basic function of the jury.”  Id. at 562, 799 P.2d at 54.   
Additionally , Batangan  emphasized that “[t]he pertinent 
consideration is whether the expert testimony will assist the 
jury without unduly prejudicing the defendant .”  Id. at 558, 799 
P.2d at 52  (emphasis added) ; see also  State v. Kony , 138 Hawai i 
1, 11, 375 P.3d 1239 , 1249 (2016) (emphasizing that “ Batangan  
does not exempt expert testimony concerning child sexual abuse 
victims from the weighing required by HRE Rule 403”) . 
  Notwithstanding these strong warning s from the  
Batangan  court and the mandatory applicability of HRE Rule 403 , 
the family court in this case admitted expansive  expert 
testimony relating both to the credibility of child victims of 
sexual abuse and the types of “child molestation behaviors” 
exhibited by typical offenders , reasoning  in a motion in limine 
proceeding that it had already been ruled on by this court and 
was thus automatically admissible under Batangan : ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 8 THE COURT: It’ s already been ruled by the Supreme Court, 
our very own Supreme Court in Batingang [sic] that it' s 
admissible because Dr. Bivens’s testimony is relevant and 
assist[s] the jury on this new found phenomena of child 
abuse. 
When the defense renewed its objection to Dr. Bivens’ testimony 
as unduly prejudicial  at trial, the court overruled the 
objection and likewise stated that  the testimony had “some 
relevance ”: 
THE COURT: In following Batangan  and State versus Silva  . . 
. the expert testimony in Silva explained the girl’s, 
perhaps, bizarre behavior like going back into the room.  I 
don’t know.  So, over your objection, there is some 
relevance in some expert testimony to assist the jurors 
with scientific and complex type of issue.  Okay.  So over 
your objection.  
Thus, in response to McDonnell’s objection s that the evidence 
was unfairly prejudic ial, the family court admitted the evidence 
on relevancy grounds  without addressing its potential  of 
producing an  unfairly prejudicial effect . 
  However,  relevancy analysis inquires only whether the 
evidence has “any tendency” to prove a fact  of consequence , 
which is  “an exceedingly low threshold for th is initial . . . 
barrier to admissibility.”  Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence Manual  § 401-3[1] (2014-2015 ed.) .  In pointed 
contrast, e videntiary decisions that assess the risk of unfair 
prejudic e of evidence under HRE Rule 403 require a careful 
“judgment call”  based on  an application of a court’s informed 
discretion .  Costales v. Rosete , 133 Hawai ʻi 453, 466, 331 P.3d ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 9 431, 444 (2014)  (quoting Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co. , 85 Hawaii 
336, 350 -51, 944 P.2d 1279, 1293 -94 (1997)) . 
  Moreover , “‘[t]he existence of disc retion requires its 
exercise[,] ’ and a court fails to properly exercise its 
discretion when it bases a decision on categorical rules, and 
not on the individual case before it .”  State v. Hern , 133 
Hawaiʻi 59, 65, 323 P.3d 1241, 1247 (App. 2013)  (second 
alteration in original ) (quoting United States v. Miller , 722 
F.2d 562, 565 (9th Cir.  1983)); accord State v. Martin , 56 Haw. 
292, 294, 535 P.2d 127, 128 (1975)  (“Discretionary action must 
be exercised on a case -by-case basis, not by any inflexible 
[blanket] policy of denial. ”).  By extension, o nce HRE Rule 403 
is invoked, “the trial judge has no discretion as to whether or 
not to engage in the balancing process.”  Montgomery v. State , 
810 S.W.2d 372, 389  (Tex. Crim. App. 1990)  (en banc)  (quoting 22 
Charles A. Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Federal Practice and 
Procedure: Evidence  § 5250, at 544–45 (1978) ). 
  This case does not involve  an incorrect or faulty HRE 
Rule 403 analysis , but, rather, a failure to engage in the 
requisite ba lancing altogether .  Both during the motion in 
limine proceeding and at trial, the family court did not addres s 
McDonnell’s contention that the probative value of the testimony 
would be substantially outweighed by its unfair prejudicial 
effect.  Rather, the trial court applied the “exceedingly low ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 10 threshold” of relevancy, Bowman, supra, § 401-3[1], and found 
that the testimony had “some relevance” and was therefore 
admissible.  Although the defense’s objection was based on HRE 
Rule 403 rather than rules relating to relevancy, t he family 
court did not mention or address the potentially unfairly 
prejudicial nature of the testimony.  And the court  further 
compounded its error by basing its evidentiary ruling on a 
categorical misapplication of the Batangan  decision, stating, 
“It’s already been ruled by the Supreme Court, our very own 
Supreme C ourt in Batingang [sic] that it’ s admissible ”.  Thus, 
in response to McDonnell’s HRE Rule 403 objection, the family 
court failed to exercise its discretion  based on an appraisal  of 
probative value and unfair prejudice  in favor of applying a 
categorical rule that the evidence was relevant and admissible 
based on its misreading of Batangan . 
  The majority agrees that the trial court “must apply 
HRE Rule 403, weighing the probative value of [the] testimony 
against the ris k that it will prejudice the defendant.”  
Majority at 39.  However, the majority  contends that the court’s 
reliance on Batangan  “does not mean t hat it abdicated its 
discretion ” but, rather, indicates that “the court considered 
relevant precedent” in deemin g Dr. Bivens’  testimony admissible.  
Majority at 2 3.  It also seeks to distinguish this case  from 
Hern, 133 Hawaii at 65, 323 P.3d at 1247, and Martin, 56 Haw. at ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 11 294, 535 P.2d at 128, arguing that the court in this case did 
not “rely on a blanket policy.”  Majority at 22. 
  The family court’s reference to Batangan  demonstrates 
that it cited applicable legal authority in rendering its 
admissibility determination.   However, rather than heed the 
Batangan  court’s instruction that the “pertinent consideration 
is whether the expert testimony will assist the jury without 
unduly prejudicing the defendant,” 71 Haw. at 558, 799 P.2d at 
52, the court failed to  consider or weigh the unfair ly 
prejudicial nature of Dr. Bivens’ testimony .  Instead of  
“exercising its discretion based on the particular 
circumstances” of McDonnell’s case, id., the court base d its 
determination on a categorical rule that Batangan  deemed such 
evidence to be somewhat relevant and thus  admissible.  Such 
automatic “adherence to predetermined rigid conduct,” Martin, 56 
Haw. at 294, 535 P.2d at 128, is precisely what Hern and Martin 
prohibit.  
  Because the family court did not make a judgment call 
when it admitted Dr. Bivens’ testimony, the re is no 
discretionary decision for this court  to review .3  It is 
                                                        
 3 When a trial court fails to exercise its discretion, there is n o 
“judgment call” for an appellate court to defer to, and the appropriate 
conclusion is a determination that the trial court committed error.  See, 
e.g., Fassberg Constr. Co. v. Hous. Auth. of L.A. , 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 375, 416 
(Cal. Ct. App. 2007); State v. Starr, 718 S.E.2d 362, 365 (N.C. 2011) 
(“[T]here is error when the trial court refuses to exercise its discretion in 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 12 elementary that  we cannot defer to the  trial court’s discretion 
in admitting evidence  where the court made no “judgment call” 
regarding the evidence .  See Martin, 56 Haw. at 294, 535 P.2d at 
128.  The family court did not exercise its  discretion  regarding 
whether to limit Dr. Bivens’ testimony or to exclude it entirely  
pursuant  to a Rule 403 balancing , thereby depriving McDonnell of 
a critical statutory requirement designed to ensure a fair 
trial.  Consequently, the conviction should be vacated and the 
case remanded for a new trial.  
II. The Court Erred in Admitting Profile Evidence  
  “Scientific and expert testimony, with their ‘aura of 
special reliability and trustworthiness, ’ courts the danger that 
the triers of fact will ‘abdicate their role of critical 
assessment ’ and ‘surrender their own common sense in weighing 
testimony. ’”  State v. Batangan , 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 
51 (1990) (alterations omitted) (first quoting United States v. 
Amaral, 488 F.2d 1148, 1152 (9th Cir. 1973); second quoting 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
the erroneous belief that it has no discretion as to the question presented.” 
(alteration in original)).  A failure to exercise discretion,  such as in 
failing to apply a Rule 403 balancing, therefore requires that the conviction 
be vacated and the case remanded for a new trial unless the error is harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  See, e.g. , State v. Shippee , 839 A.2d 566, 571 
(Vt. 2003) (s tating that a party challenging a court’s Rule 403 decision 
would prevail if the party can prove that the trial court “completely 
withheld its discretion,” and vacating and remanding); Contemporary Mission, 
Inc. v. Famous Music Corp. , 557 F.2d 918, 928 (2d  Cir. 1977) (concluding that 
because the trial judge did not engage in Rule 403 balancing in the first 
instance, the case must be remanded to the district court for the purpose of 
making a Rule 403 determination).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 13 State v. Brown , 687 P.2d 751, 773 (Or. 1984); and then quoting 
United States v. Azure , 801 F.2d 336, 341 (8th Cir. 1986) ).  
Although expert testimony may be admissible in child sex ual 
abuse cases to explain the seemingly bizarre behavior of child 
victims that would otherwise reflect poorly on a complaining 
witness’s credibility, see Batangan, 71 Haw.  at 557-58, 799 P.2d 
at 51-52, courts must be cautious in admitting expert 
psychological testimony that crosses the line into impermissible 
profile evidence  relating  to behaviors and characteristics of 
“the typical offender .”  The position taken by the majority in 
this case broadens the scope of Batangan  significantly in a 
manner that invades the province of the jury and allows for 
consideration of  profile evidence that is unfairly and overly 
prejudicial to defendants.  Such extension of Batangan  is 
contrary to the prudent advisement that courts “ must proceed 
with caution  in admitting expert testimony in these cases,” 
which, although difficult to prove, “are equally difficult to 
defend against.”  Id. at 562, 799 P.2d at 53-54 (emphasis 
added). 
A. Expert Testimony and Profile Evidence  
  Profile evidence “ describes sets of observable 
behavioral patterns ” specific to a “typical offender.”  3 
Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence  
§ 7:11 (4th ed.  Supp. 2016 ) [hereinafter, Mueller & Kirkpatrick, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 14 Federal Evidence ]; see also  People v. Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr. 2d 
479, 484 (Cal. Ct. App. 2001)  (defining “profile” as “a 
collection of conduct and characteristics commonly displayed by 
those who commit a certain crime”) .  Although “profiles”  may be 
most commonly  used by law enforcement as an investigat ive tool 
in identifying crime suspects, “t estimony describing profiles of 
typical offenders . . . should generally be excluded ” at trial.4  
Mueller & Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11.  
Exclusion is particularly important where “the evidence relates 
to the defendant . . . and is offered to prove guilt.”  Id. 
  The admission of profile evidence against a defendant  
raises serious concerns about the proper role of expert 
psychological testimony in criminal prosecutions .  “[A] criminal 
trial is concerned with individual guilt, and not with ‘the sort 
of person’ that certain beh avioral patterns often describe.”   
id.; see also  United States v. Banks , 36 M.J. 150, 161 (C.M.A. 
1992) (rejecting use of profile evidence as evidence of 
defendant’s substantive guilt and noting that “[o]ur system of 
justice is a trial on the facts, not a litmus -paper test for 
                                                        
 4 Notably, even the use of profile eviden ce as a purely 
investigative tool by law enforcement is subject to strict limitations in 
this jurisdiction.  See, e.g. , State v. Trainor , 83 Hawai i 250, 258 -59, 925 
P.2d 818, 826 -27 (1996) (holding that law enforcement may not initiate 
investigative stops  based solely on the conclusion that the suspect’s 
characteristics and behaviors match a “drug courier profile,” in part because 
the profile described “an enormous set of presumably innocent travelers”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 15 conformity with any set of characteristics, factors, or 
circumstance s”).  “Every defendant has a right to be tried based 
on the evidence against him or her,” and the use of profile 
evidence by the State may encourage a jury to infer guilt based 
solely on the fact that the defendant is alleged by the 
complainant to have engaged in behaviors or exhibited 
characteristics that match the relevant profile.   United States 
v. Hernandez-Cuartas, 717 F.2d 552 , 555 (11th Cir. 1983) ; see 
also State v. Kony , 138 Hawai i 1, 12, 375 P.3d 1239, 1250 (2016) 
(“[T]he idea of reasonable doubt requires proof connecting the 
defendant to the crime and does not permit proof that a 
defendant is more likely to be guilty because he or she may 
share characteristics or traits with discr ete populations of 
offenders.”) .  Indeed, profile evidence “implies that criminals, 
and only criminals, act in a given way” and often belies the 
fact that “certain behavior may be consistent with both innocent 
and illegal behavior.”  Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr.  2d at 485.  Use 
of profile evidence against a defendant  may therefore erode the 
presumption of innocence in criminal trials and impede the 
defendant’s ability to mount a defense.  
  Profile evidence may also be used to impermissibly 
enhance the credibility  of the complaining witness, insofar as 
jurors may infer that the witness is  telling the truth regarding  
abuse because certain behaviors or characteristics of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 16 defendant , as testified to by the complainant,  match the 
“typical offender” behaviors  described by an expert witness .  
See Kony, 138 Hawaii at 12, 375 P.3d at 1250 (observing that 
“expert testimony regarding the common behavior of child sexual 
abuse victims ‘carries the potential of bolstering the 
credibility ’” of the  witness (quoting Batangan , 71 Haw. at 556, 
799 P.2d at 51)); see also People v. Williams , 987 N.E.2d 260, 
263 (N.Y. 2013)  (eliciting testimony from an expert witness to 
show that the victim’s version of events matches that of a 
typical abuse scenario has “the prejudicial effect of implying 
that the expert found the testimony of this particular 
complainant to be credible --even though the witness began his 
testimony claiming no knowledge of the cas e before the court”);  
State v. Transfiguracion , No. SCWC -11-0000048, 2013 WL 1285112, 
at *6 (Haw. Mar. 28, 2013) (Order Rejecting Application for Writ 
of Certiorari) (Acoba J., dissenting)  (observing that expert 
testimony on patterns of committing child sex ual abuse and the 
characteristics of child molesters may bolster the complaining 
witnesses’ credibility because “the expert ’s testimony could 
‘guide the jury to a conclusion’  that the complaining witnesses 
were telling the truth by demonstrating that the details in 
their testimony matched the details in a typical child abuse 
case”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 17 In addition to increasing  the credibility of the 
complaining witness , the near or perfect match of the behaviors 
testified to by the complainant  and those related by the expert 
may serve to bolster the expert’s own credibility.  Jurors may 
be particularly  struck when an expert witness asserts having no 
direct knowledge of the asserted facts in the case  but testifies 
to behaviors that provide nearly an exact match to the 
complainant ’s testimony of events , thereby increasing the 
“possibility that the jury may  be unduly influenced by the 
expert’s opinion .”  See Batangan , 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51 
(quoting State v. Kim , 64 Haw. 598, 607, 645 P.2d 1330, 1337 
(1982), overruled in part by  Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 
48). 
  The inherent prejudice stemming  from the admission of 
profile testimony as substantive evidence of a defendant’s guilt 
has been  analogized to the prejudice that inheres  when character 
evidence or prior bad acts are used to show that a defendant has 
a propensity to engage in certain crim inal behavior s.  See 
Mueller & Kirkpatrick,  Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11  (noting 
that “a criminal trial is concerned with individual guilt ” and 
that “profile evidence is very much like character evidence ” 
when offered to pro ve guilt).5  Reliance on a  defendant’s 
                                                        
 5 With a few limited exceptions, HRE Rule 404(a) pr ohibits the 
admission of character evidence to prove propensity, while HRE Rule 404(b) 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 18 character or prior acts to establish that the defendant 
committed the offense charged is generally prohibited  under 
state and federal rules of evidence , because although such facts 
might “logically be persuasive that [the defendant] is by 
propensity a probable perpetrator of the crime,” the evidence 
may “so overpersuade [the jury] as to prejudge one with a bad 
general record and deny [the defen dant] a fair opportunity to 
defend against a particular charge.”  Christopher B. Mueller &  
Laird C. Kirkpatrick, Evidence  § 4.11, at 183 (4th ed. 20 09) 
[hereinafter, Mueller & Kirkpatrick, Evidence ] (quoting 
Michelson v. United States , 335 U.S. 469, 475 -76 (1948)).  
  Authoritative expert testimony regarding child sex ual 
abuse may likewise encourage jurors to “abdicate their role of 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
excludes evidence of other acts to prove that the defendant acted in 
conformity therewith.  See HRE Rule 404 (1993).  HRE Rule 404 provides in 
relevant part as follows:  
 (a) Character evidence generally.  Evidence of a 
person’s character or a trait of a person’s character is 
not admissible for the purpose of proving action in 
conformity therewith on a particular occasion . . . .  
 . . . . 
 (b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts .  Evidence of 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove 
the character of a person in order to show action in 
conformity therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where 
such evidence is probative of another fact that is of 
consequence to th e determination of the action, such as 
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, 
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake 
or accident.  
HRE Rule 404 (1993).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 19 critical assessment ,” Batangan, 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51 
(alterations omitted) (quoting Brown, 687 P.2d at 773 ).  An 
invitation by an expert witness to reason that “criminals act in 
a certain way; the defendant acted that way; therefore , the 
defendant is a criminal ,”6 risks usurping the role of the jury 
and denying the defendant a fair opportunity to defend against 
the government’s case  in the same way that use of character or 
prior acts evidence risks “ovepersua d[ing]” the trier of fact 
and impeding the defendant’s ability to defend against the 
charge.  Mueller & Kirkpatrick,  Evidence , supra, § 4.11, at 183  
(quoting Michelson , 335 U.S. at 475-76).  Indeed, the policy 
concerns with regard to character evidence and profile evidence 
are so similar that several courts have deemed profile evidence 
inadmissible on the ground that it constituted improper 
character or prior acts evidence.7 
                                                        
 6 Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 485.  
 7 See, e.g. , State v. Hester , 760 P.2d 27, 33 -34 (Idaho 1988) 
(expert testimony regarding the common traits of child molesters and that the 
defendant exhibited those traits was inadmissible character evidence, because 
the “evidence that [the defendant] exhibited character traits simi lar to 
those of known child abusers” was used to “prove that [the defendant] acted 
in conformance with those traits in this particular instance”); State v. 
Nelson, 501 S.E.2d 716, 718, 720 -22 (S.C. 1998) (concluding that evidence of 
children’s toys and oth er similar evidence seized from defendant’s bedroom 
combined with expert testimony that pedophiles often “have a pretty good 
stash” of childlike items was excludable character evidence, and rejecting 
State’s argument that this evidence was “relevant to sho w motive or intent” 
and observing that this argument was “a cleverly disguised way of asserting 
[that the defendant] committed the crimes because [the defendant] has a 
propensity to commit sexual offenses”); Ballard v. Hunt , 772 S.E.2d 199, 204 
(W. Va. 201 5) (holding “that the opinion evidence of an expert witness 
proffered by the State in a criminal prosecution, merely to show that the 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 20 Accordingly , the use of profile evidence as indicative 
of a defendant’s substantive guilt is “inherently prejudicial .”  
Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 485.   Decisions of  other 
jurisdictions that have considered expert psychological 
testimony in sex ual abuse cases are instructive  of when such 
testimony takes on the form of impermissible  profile evidence.  
These cases  recognize that expert testimony becomes profile 
evidence when the testimony  describes the behavioral patterns of 
offenders , rather than  relaying the psychological 
characteristics of victims , and the courts have precluded the 
evidence’s admission at trial.  
  In Robbie, a California appellate court addressed 
testimony of an expert qualified in “the behaviors and conduct 
of persons who commit sexual assaults.”  112 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 
483.  The expert testified about the behaviors of sexual assault 
offenders, focusing particularly on the common absence of force 
and the lack of physical resistance on the part of victims.  Id. 
at 483-84.  The expert in Robbie never directly op ined on 
whether the defendant was a sex offender but instead responded 
to a series of hypothetical questions posed by the prosecution 
that correlated with the complaining witness’ s description of 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
accused has the character trait of a pedophile . . . is inadmissible . . . to 
prove that on a particular occasion the accu sed acted in accordance with that 
character trait”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 21 the events.  Id.  The court concluded that the expert’s 
testimony amounted to improper profiling testimony.  Id. at 488.  
The Robbie court observed that reliance on profile evidence is 
“unfair[]” and “inherently prejudicial” because “[t]he jury is 
improperly invited to conclude that, because the defendant 
manifeste d some characteristics, he committed a crime.”  Id. at 
485, 487.  The effect of the expert testimony in Robbie was not 
to help the jury evaluate the prosecution’s evidence ; rather, 
the testimony led  the jury to the conclusion that “[the] 
defendant was guil ty because he fit the profile.”  Id. at 487.  
This “significantly bolstered” the complaining witness’ s 
testimony and was thus “highly prejudicial ” to the defendant.  
Id. at 488. 
  The Supreme Court of Kentucky has similarly ruled that 
expert testimony regarding the typical habits and 
characteristics of child sex ual abuse perpetrators was 
inadmissible in Kurtz v. Commonwealth , 172 S.W.3d 409, 413 (Ky. 
2005).  The expert in Kurtz testified that perpetrators of 
sexual abuse of a child tend to be a family member or close 
friend of the victim and that it is common for the perpetrator 
to groom the victim by providing praise, gifts, and economic 
assistance as a way to break down the victim’s defenses.  Id. at 
413.  The expert further  testified that it was not unusual for 
perpetrators to abuse only some of the children of a household, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 22 which make s it more likely that the victim would keep it secret.  
Id.  The court concluded that the  testimony “regarding the 
typical sex abuse perpetrato r unmistakably touched on both the 
habits and the profile characteristics of that class of 
individuals which we have held is not relevant or permissible 
for the jury to consider during the Commonwealth’s case -in-
chief.”8  Id. at 414. 
  Likewise i n Hall v. State, an Arkansas appellate court 
considered expert testimony regarding the dynamics of child 
sexual abuse, including the percentage of cases  in which  the 
perpetrator is known to the child ahead of time, is a relative 
or friend of the family, and has aut hority over the children.  
692 S.W.2d 769, 770 -71 (Ark. Ct. App. 1985); see State v. 
Ketchner , 339 P.3d 645, 648 ( Ariz. 2014) (citing Hall 
approvingly for the proposition that courts have precluded 
expert testimony relating to persons who sexually abuse 
children).  The expert also testified regarding the percentage 
of child sexual abuse cases that occur in the home and common 
characteristics of perpetrators.  Hall, 692 S.W.2d at 770, 773.  
The expert stated that she had not personally examined any of 
                                                        
 8 The court also rejected the prosecution’s contention that a 
portion of the expert testimony was offered in rebuttal of anticipated 
arguments and evidence to be presented by the defendant; the court noted that 
“there is absolutely no authority for the conce pt of ‘preemptive rebuttals.’”  
Kurtz, 172 S.W.3d at 414.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 23 the individuals  involved in the case and that the information 
she would give was based primarily on national statistics.  Id. 
at 771.  The Arkansas court concluded that “this type [of] 
evidence was not of proper benefit to the jury in this case” and 
that “it was not introduced to rebut a misconception about the 
presumed behavior of a rape victim but to prove . . . that the 
circumstances and details in this case match the circumstances 
and details usually found in child abuse cases.”  Id. at 773.  
The court noted that although testimony concerning the 
vocabulary used by young children was beneficial to the jury, 
much of the expert’s testimony concerning the dynamics of child 
abuse was “di stractive and prejudicial.”  Id. 
  The Oregon Supreme Court has also held that expert 
testimony offered to explain a child’s denial of the alleged 
abuse could not include testimony regarding grooming techniques 
used by child abusers.  State v. Beauvais , 354 P.3d 680, 693  
n.14 (Or. 2015) (discussing approvingly the court’s decision in 
State v. Hansen , 743 P.2d 157 ( Or. 1987)).  Although testimony 
pertaining to the typical responses of sexually abused children 
may assist the trier of fact in understanding a child 
complainant’s behavior, “ the specific techniques used by some 
child abusers ‘to get close to the victim, ’ which may result in 
the child’ s emotional dependence on the abuser, are irrelevant 
to the effect the dependence has on the child’ s willingness to  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 24 implicate the abuser. ”  Id. (quoting Hansen, 743 P.2d at 157).  
This is so because “[i] t is the emotional dependence, not the 
specific acts that produce it, that helps to explain the child’s 
behavior.”  Id. (quoting Hansen, 743 P.2d at 157).  Because an 
expert may describe the common behaviors of victims without 
reference to the “victim ization process ” and the typical 
behaviors of offenders,  such evidence is irrelevant “and, as 
such, rarely will pass the balancing test” for prejudice, 
confusion, or delay.  Id. (quoting  State v. Stevens , 970 P.2d 
215, 223 (Or. 1998)).  
  Similarly, a Washington appellate court deemed 
inadmissible  expert testimo ny that a majority of child abuse 
cases involv ed a biological, male parent.  State v. Maule , 667 
P.2d 96, 99 ( Wash. Ct. App. 1983); accord State v. Petrich , 683 
P.2d 173, 180 ( Wash. 1984) (citing Maule approvingly and holding 
that expert testimony regardin g the percentage of cases 
involving a perpetrator with a pre existing relationship with the 
child was highly prejudicial even when made in the context of 
explaining delayed reporting), modified on other grounds by  
State v. Kitchen , 756 P.2d 105 ( Wash. 1988).  The Washington 
court rejected the State’s contention that the evidence was 
merely buttressing the expert’s qualifications, observing that 
the testimony was offered as substantive evidence to help 
persuade the jury that the defendant was guilty.  Maule, 667 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 25 P.2d at 99.  The court noted that the expert testimony matched 
the circumstances of the defendant and complaining witness in 
the underlying case  and explained that “[s]uch evidence invites 
a jury to conclude that because the defendant has been 
identified by an expert with experience in child abuse cases as 
a member of a group having a higher incidence of child sexual 
abuse, it is more likely the defendant committed the crim e.”  
Id.  The court noted that, like all relevant evidence, the 
admissibility of the testimony  must be determined pursuant to 
Washington’s evidence rule relating to prejudice, confusion, and 
waste of time.  Id. at 99-100. 
  The Florida Supreme Court has si milarly rejected 
expert evidence “about common characteristics of the home 
environment where child sex ual abuse occurs and about the 
characteristics of abusers.”  Flanagan v. State , 625 So. 2d 827, 
828 (Fla. 1993) .  The court concluded that the evidence wa s not 
permitted as “background information,” noting that “the 
courtroom is not a classroom to be used to educate a jury on an 
entire field only tangentially related to the issues at trial.”  
Id. at 829.  It also concluded that the testimony was  
“completely  inappropriate as substantive evidence of guilt.”  
Id.  The court observed that “[i]f anything, [the] profile 
evidence tended to show that because [the defendant] and his 
house had certain traits which fit [the expert’s] child sex ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 26 offender profile, [the defendant] necessarily sexually abused 
his daughter.”  Id.  The court observed that this mode of proof 
would be akin to establishing that a defendant has a certain 
character trait in order to show that he acted in conformity 
with that trait, which is “forbidden by the rules of evidence.”  
Id. 
  These cases and many others establish that expert 
evidence explaining psychological characteristics or behaviors 
of victims must be distinguished from profile evidence  that 
describes  behavioral patterns of offenders.  Courts have 
precluded the admission of such profile evidence  against a 
defendant on a variety of grounds, including on the basis that 
the evidence  lacks relevancy, that it is unfairly prejudicial, 
that it constitutes impermissible character or prior  bad acts 
evidence, or that it does not assist the trier of fact to 
understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue under rules 
relating to expert witness testimony.  See Mueller & 
Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11 ( observing that 
profile evidence is “condemned sometimes on relevancy grounds” 
but noting its similarity to character evidence); Burnette v. 
Commonwealth , 729 S.E.2d 740, 7 49 n.5 (Va. Ct. App. 2012) 
(noting that “numerous jurisdictions have held that profile  
evidence is categorically inadmissible, though the underlying 
rationales differ widely” and identifying relevancy, unfair ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 27 prejudice, and impermissible character evidence as possible 
grounds).  
B. Dr. Bivens’ Testimony Included Profile Evidence  
  In its motion  in limine to admit Dr. Bivens’ 
testimony, the State initially proffered Dr. Bivens as an expert 
who would testify regarding the characteristics and conduct of 
child sex ual abuse victims to assist the jury in assessing 
Minor’s credibility as it related to her “delayed and 
inconsistent reporting.”  At the subsequent hearing on the 
parties’ motions in limine, however, the State identified the 
scope of Dr. Bivens’ testimony as much broader and stated that 
he would testify to “the general dynamics of child sexu al 
abuse.”  Thereafter, i n response to McDonnell’s  renewed 
objection to the admission of Dr. Bivens’ testimony at trial, 
the State indicated  that Dr. Bivens would testify to “the 
process of child molestation”  in general . 
  At trial, Dr. Bivens  was qualified as an expert in 
clinical psychology with a subspecialty  in child sexual abuse.  
In qualifying Dr. Bivens as an expert witness, the testimony 
focused on his expertise in the common characteristics and 
methods of “child molesters.”  Dr. Bivens  described  his Ph.D. 
dissertation as follows:  
So my dissertation compared a group of convicted child 
molesters to a group of men who were matched for the same 
age and same ethnicity and same general background but were 
not child molesters, and then we admi nistered test data to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 28 distinguish some of the traits that child molesters have 
that normal men don’t have.  
  Consistent with his expertise in identifying “the 
traits that child molesters have that normal men don’t have” and 
in child sex ual abuse generally,  Dr. Bivens gave testimony 
regarding three general areas: the characteristics and conduct 
of child sexual abuse victims , the behaviors and characteristics  
of “child molesters, ” and the child sex ual abuse process .  As 
illustrative of the difference between evidence allowable  under 
Batangan in contrast to  profile evidence that should be 
excluded, each of these three categories of testimony will be 
discussed . 
i. Testimony on Characteristics and Behaviors of Child Sex ual 
Abuse Victims  
  Dr. Bivens testified as to the “typical response for a 
child who is in a sexually abusive situation” and the reasons 
underlying delayed reporting and incomplete disclosures by such 
children.  Dr. Bivens further explained  the common experience of 
“tunnel memory” that causes a child victim’s recollection of a 
traumatic event to be blurred or incomplete.9 
  This testimony falls  within the general parameters  of 
evidence found admissible in Batangan, insofar as it may have 
                                                        
 9 McDonnell challenged Dr. Bivens’ testimony regarding delayed 
reporting, incompleteness of reporting, and tunnel mem ory on relevancy 
grounds.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 29 helped dispel the jurors’ misconceptions regarding child sex ual 
abuse victims resulting from an imposition of “standards of 
normalcy on child victim/witnesses who consistently respond in 
distinctly abnormal fashion.”   71 Haw. 552, 557, 799 P.2d 48, 51 
(1990) (quoting State v. Moran , 728 P.2d 248, 251 (Ariz. 1986)) .  
Such evidence may have assisted the trier of fact in assessing 
Minor’s testimony , as delayed reporting and incomplete reporting 
may be “seemingly inconsistent with behavioral norms of other 
victims of assault.”  Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 5 1.  Accordingly, 
Batangan  suggests that this testimony may have been  admissible 
at trial subject to  HRE Rule 403  and other rules of evidence .  
Id. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52.  
ii. Testimony on Characteristics  of Child Molesters  
  Dr. Bivens also testified regarding identifiable 
characteristics of child sex ual abuse offenders.  Specifically, 
Dr. Bivens discussed the following with respect to the  typical 
individual most likely to be culpable for sexually abusing a 
child: 
 In “the vast majority” of cases, or “85 
percent of the time, ” the child has a “pre -
existing nonsexual rela tionship with their 
molester.”  
 Abused childr en “generally know[] the 
abuser.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 30  There is a “documented phenomenon” of incest  
that occurs when “the molester is living in 
the child’s own home” and “is some how 
affiliated with the family, whether they’re 
a direct blood member or stepparent.”  
 “100 percent of in cest offenders report 
molesting in their own home, ” and child 
sexual abuse in general “usually ” occurs in 
the child’s home or the offender’s home.  
Thus, Dr. Bivens identified that in the vast majority of  child 
sexual abuse cases, the perpetrator is likely an individual who 
has a preexisting  relationship with the child , is affiliated in 
some way with the child’s family, is living in the child’ s home, 
and will abuse the child in the offender’s home.   Dr. Bivens 
further stated that it “is not possible” to look at an 
individual’s  “demographic[s] ” to determine whether or not the 
individual is a “child molester,” but that “[c]hild molesters 
are defined by” the attendant behaviors.  In other words, child 
molesters cannot be identified by demographics such as age, 
ethnicity , or race; rather,  child molesters are defined by their 
behaviors, such as where the offender lives , where the abuser 
commits the offense, and other  patterns of behavior discussed in 
greater detail below. 
  This testimony of Dr. Bivens does not relate to or 
explain the “seemingly bizarre” behavior of child sex ual abuse ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 31 victims to address issues relating to a child witness ’s 
credibility.  Batangan, 71 Haw. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52.  Rather, 
Dr. Bivens’ testimony describe s behaviors and characteristics 
common to child sex ual abuse offenders .  See People v. Robbie , 
112 Cal. Rptr. 2d 479, 48 4 (Cal. Ct. App. 2001) (defining 
“profile” as “a collection of conduct and characteristics 
commonly displayed by those who commit a certain crime”) . 
  The profile testimony in this case goes far beyond the 
type of evidence recognized by Batangan  as admissible.  Relying 
on the “aura of special reliability and trustworthiness” of Dr. 
Bivens’ testimony,10 the jurors may  well have concluded that  
(1) child sex ual abuse offenders typically have a 
preexisting relationship with the child, are 
related to the child, and have access to or 
live in the child’s home ; 
(2) McDonnell had a preexisting relationship with 
Minor, was related to Minor, and lived in the 
home togeth er with Minor; therefore , 
(3) McDonnell may have, possibly, or likely 
sexually abused Minor. 
See Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr. 2d 479 at 487 ; see also  State v. 
Petrich, 683 P.2d 173, 180 (Wash. 1984) ( rejecting testimony 
that in “eighty -five to ninety percent of our cases, the child 
                                                        
 10 Batangan , 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51 (quoting United States 
v. Amaral , 488 F.2d 1148, 1152 (9th Cir. 1973)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 32 is molested by someone they already know” because it “invite[d] 
the jury to conclude” that a defendant was “statistically more 
likely to have committed the crime” ), modified  on other grounds 
by State v. Kitchen , 756 P.2d 105 (Wash. 1988) .  Expert 
testimony of this nature invades the province of the jury to 
evaluate the evidence  and creates a risk of confusion , as it 
focuses the jury’s attention on innocuous circumstances as 
evidence that the abuse occurred.11  It also invites the jury to 
conclude that because McDonnell was identified by an expert with 
experience in child abuse cases as “a member of a group having a 
higher incidence of child sexual abuse, ” State v. Maule , 667 
                                                        
 11 The majority acknowledges that the “risk of profiling” McDonnell 
as an abuser based on Dr. Bivens’ testimony relating to the characteristics 
of a typical offender was “high” because its use o f probabilities “implied a 
high statistical likelihood that abusers would exhibit certain 
characteristics, and those characteristics happened to fit McDonnell.”  
Majority at 42 .  Thus, according to the majority, this evidence “presented a 
risk of misleadin g the jury.”  Majority at 42.  
 The majority contends, however, that Dr. Bivens could have 
“testified generally” to the characteristics of abusers, such as “abusers are 
often related to their victims and . . . such abuse normally  occurs in the 
home,” so lon g as he did not rely on statistics.  Majority at 42 (emphases 
added).  Though such testimony would not include numerical percentages, 
statements of typical offender characteristics or that offenders “often” or 
“normally” engage in particular conduct inhere ntly make generalizations 
regarding molester behavior based on the science of statistics.  See, e.g. , 
State v. Kony , 138 Hawai i 1, 12 n.15, 375 P.3d 1239, 1250 n.15 (2016) 
(recounting Dr. Bivens’ testimony in that case that percentages are used to 
“give[] a general idea of, you know, how the phenomenon most often occurs”).  
Had Dr. Bivens stated that “abusers are often related to their victims” and 
that the abuse “ normally  occurs in the home,” Majority at 42  (emphases 
added), the jury may still have been m isled “into believing that, since 
McDonnell was both related to Minor and lived with her, McDonnell must have 
abused her in their home.”  Majority at 42.  Therefore, replacement of 
statistical percentages in an expert’s testimony with adjectives intended t o 
convey the same information (i.e., “often” or “normally” in lieu of “85%”) 
serves only to make a change in form, and the testimony’s inherently 
prejudicial substance remains.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 33 P.2d 96, 99 (Wash . Ct. App. 1983) , it is more likely that 
McDonnell committed the offenses charged.  Thus, this portion of 
Dr. Bivens’ testimony falls well outside the scope of the 
evidence deemed admissible in Batangan, and its unfair, overly 
prejudicial nature required its exclusion at trial  under HRE 
Rule 403 . 
iii.  Testimony on the Abuse Process  
  Dr. Bivens  also testified regarding “the abuse 
process,” identifying four primary methods “being typical of 
most molestations,” including: “[s]educing and testing, masking 
sex as a game, emotional and verbal coercion, and taking 
advantage of a child in a vulnerable position.”  As the source 
of his understanding of these four primary methods, Dr. Bivens 
cited to “convicted molesters themselves  . . . describing how 
they go about doing the abuse .”  Dr. Bivens then went on to 
describe each of the four methods in detail.  
  Dr. Bivens testified that “[s]educing and testing 
refers to how a molester will establish a healthy touching 
relationship with a child” and then slowly incorporate sexual 
touching into that relationship.  The child  may “simply allow 
the touching. ”  In this scenario, the molester will “tell 
[himself]” that “the child likes it” and “the child wants [him] 
to continue.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 34   Dr. Bivens elaborated that masking sex as a game is 
similar to seducing and testing, except that this method starts 
with a “playful touch r elationship,” such as “tickling” and 
“wrestling.”  Thereafter, the abuser incorporates sexual 
touching into the relationship.  Dr. Bivens stated that “[t]he 
molesters often report that, Well, I would have stopped if the 
child objected, but they didn’t obje ct, and so I just kept 
going.” 
  With respect to emotional and verbal coercion, Dr. 
Bivens described that the child molester will bargain with or 
bribe the child for sexual contact.  The molester may  give the 
child treats or gifts or  withhold punishment  as a sort of “quid 
pro quo exchange .”  The child may “feel like [he or she is] part 
of” the b argaining process and “willing [ly] participate[ s] in 
the sex in order to either get the reward or avoid the 
punishment.”  T he molester may also rely on  “guilt tripping”  to 
obtain sex from the child.  
  Finally, Dr. Bivens testified that that the  fourth 
method, whereby an abuser will “tak[e] advantage of a child in a 
vulnerable position ,” “most often” refers to approaching and 
sexually abusing a sleeping child.  Dr. Bivens described that 
the child victim may in fact be awake, but that the victim 
“play[s] possum because [the child]  didn’t know what to do, and 
the sex offense continues in that fashion.”  Dr. Bivens related ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 35 that “the offenders frequently report that they would have 
stopped if the child had put up a fight,” but because the child 
victim does not resist, the perpet rator “continue[s] offending.”  
  During his testimony, Dr. Bivens stated  that child 
victims will “frequently acquiesce to what the molester is  doing 
and they will tend to go alon g with it.”  He also stated that in 
general, “probably 80 percent of the time there’s not a ny real 
physical force involved ” in child sex ual abuse situations  and 
that “more than half of child molesters who were willing to  talk 
about their crime admitted to committing acts of molestati on 
with other people present.”  
  Dr. Bivens’ testimony on the abuse process 
“describe[d] sets of observable behavioral patterns” specific to 
a “typical [child sex ual abuse] offender ,” thus constituting 
profile evidence .  Mueller & Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , 
supra, § 7:11 (emphasis added) .  Significantly,  a primary source 
for the “typical” abuse process was information provided 
directly by child sex molesters  who had disclosed their  own 
personal crimes in a research study .  Such evidence  did not 
properly assist the trier of fact in this case in determining 
whether McDonnell committed the crimes with which he was 
charged.  See State v. Clements , 770 P.2d 447, 454 (Kan. 1989) 
(stating that expert testimony detailing the characteristics and 
behaviors  “of the individual who typically sexually abuses ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 36 children did not assist the jury in determining if the child was 
sexually abused ,” and “the only inference which can be drawn 
from such evide nce, namely that a defendant who matches the 
profile must be guilty, is an impermissible one ”); State v. 
Stevens, 970 P.2d 215, 223 (Or. 1998) ( concluding that expert 
testimony on child sexual abuse  may not “provid[e] details of 
the victimization process” because they are “irrelevant . . . 
and, as such, rarely will pass the balancing test” of probative 
value versus risk of unfair prejudice).  
  Rather, Dr. Bivens’ testimony on the abuse process  
facilitated a showing that “the circumstances and details in 
this case match [ed] the circumstances and details usually found 
in child abuse cases.”  Hall v. State , 692 S.W.2d 769, 773 (Ark. 
Ct. App 1985).  While Dr. Bivens may not have been a ware of the 
facts of this case,  the prosecution was.  By the nature of the 
questions asked on direct examination, the State was able to 
line up Dr. Bivens’ testimony with Minor’s testimony; indeed, as 
McDonnell forcefully describe s in his appellate brief , Dr. 
Bivens’ description of the abuse process established a near 
blueprint o f the conduct charged by the State.12 
                                                        
 12 McDonnell gave multiple examples of consistencies between 
the facts of this case and Dr. Bivens’ testimony in his opening brief:  
This case involved no physical force.  Dr. Bivens testified 
that “probably 80 percent of the time there’s no physical 
force involved” in molestation.  
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 37   Further, Dr. Bivens’ testimony on the typical abuse 
process invited the jury to “abdicate [ its] role of critical 
assessment”13 and to assume that because “criminals act in a 
certain way,” and because the defendant was alleged to have 
“acted that way,” “the defendant is a criminal.”  Robbie, 112 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
McDonnell had a pre -existing non -sexual relationship with 
[Minor].  Dr. Bivens testified that “85 percent of the time 
. . . the child has a pre -existing non -sexual relationship 
with their molester.”  
McDonnell was [Minor]’s adoptive father.  Dr. Bivens  
testified that “there’s a documented phenomenon called 
incest when the molester is living in the child’s own home 
[and] is somehow affiliated with the family, whether 
they’re a direct blood member or stepparent or an uncle 
that’s living in the home [.]” 
[Minor] testified to assaults that all happened at home.  
Dr. Bivens testified that “100 percent of incest offenders 
report molesting in their own home.”  
[Minor] testified that McDonnell assaulted her when her 
mother was at home.  Dr. Bivens testified that “ more than 
half of child molesters . . . admitted to committing acts 
of molestation with other people present [.]” 
[Minor] described having a healthy relationship with 
McDonnell.  Dr. Bivens testified that “a molester will 
establish a healthy touching relati onship with a child in 
advance of any sexual contact.”  
[Minor] alleged that McDonnell would trade sexual contact 
for “benefits.”  Dr. Bivens testified that molesters use 
emotional and verbal coercion, “if you give me this, I’ll 
give you that,” to “obtain s ex from the child.”  
[Minor] alleged that the first time McDonnell assaulted 
her, she was asleep in his bed.  Dr. Bivens testified that 
molesters will take advantage of a child in a vulnerable 
position, which “most often refers to approaching a 
sleeping  child.” 
(Internal citations omitted)  (formatting altered) . 
 13 Batangan , 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d at 51 (quoting State v. Brown , 
687 P.2d 751, 773 (Or. 1984)).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 38 Cal. Rptr. 2d 479 at 485 .  The near identical match between Dr. 
Bivens’ testimony  on the typical abuse process and Minor’s 
account of events also unquestionably bolstered Minor’s 
credibility as a complaining witness .  In turn, Minor’s 
description of the abuse may have also bolstered the credibility 
of Dr. Bivens himself, as the jury was pre sented with the 
testimony of a child alleged to have been sexually abused  that 
matched the testimony of the psychologist who was qualified by 
the court  as an expert in identifying patterns of sexual abuse.  
The jury may also have considered Minor’s stateme nts to give 
more credence to Dr. Bivens’ qualifications as an expert in the 
dynamics of child sexual abuse  or otherwise found it to enhance 
his “aura of special reliability and trustworthiness.”  
Batangan , 71 Haw. at 556, 799 P.2d 48, 51 (1990) (quoting United 
States v. Amaral , 488 F.2d 1148, 1152 (9th Cir. 1973)).  
  In summary, t he profile evidence in this case was 
pervasive  within, and a significant part of , Dr. Bivens’ abuse 
process testimony .  The testimony  provided a near identical 
match to the alleg ations of Minor, which increased the risk that 
the jury would improperly assume McDonnell’s guilt because he 
was alleged to have acted in a manner consistent with a “typical 
child molester .”  The matching testimony also posed a danger 
that Minor’s credibility as a complaining witness would be 
inappropriately bolstered , that Dr. Bivens’ testimo ny would be  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 39 given greater weight, and that the jury would be unduly 
influenced by the expert’s testimony.  Accordingly , the profile 
evidence testified to by Dr . Bivens  presented an unacceptable 
risk of unfair prejudice to McDonnell , and HRE Rule 403 required 
its exclusion . 
a. The Majority Erroneously Concludes that the Abuse Process 
Testimony Was Admissible in This Case  
  The majority contends, however, that Dr. Bi vens’ 
testimony on the abuse process did not constitute profile 
evidence.  Majority at 38.  To support this conclusion, the 
majority relies on Dr. Bivens’ statement s that there is not a 
typical child molester profile and that it is not possible to 
look at an individual’s “demographic characteristics” to 
“determine whether someone is a child molester .”  Majority at 
39. 
  The majority thus maintains  that despite Dr. Bive ns 
informing the jury that his dissertation compared a group of 
convicted child molesters to non -child molesters to distinguish 
traits “child molesters have that normal men don’t have,” and 
despite providing the jury with a template of the typical 
behavior s of molesters that matched the allegations in this 
case, Dr. Bivens’ testimony did not constitute profile evidence.  
Majority at 38—41.  However, Dr. Bivens’ testimony indisputably 
described to the jury in great detail the behaviors and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 40 characteristics of  a typical child molester, and , as such, 
constituted profile evidence.  See Mueller & Kirkpatrick, 
Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11 (defining profile evidence); 
Robbie, 112 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 483 (same).14 
  Additionally , profile evidence is not limited to 
demographic characteristics, and although Dr. Bivens indicated 
that it is not possible to look at a person’s demographic or 
personality characteristics to determine whether that person is 
a child abuse offender, he was definitive in his testimony that 
child sexual abusers are defined by a common set of “behaviors.”  
As stated, “profile evidence” describes both characteristics and 
“sets of observable behavioral  patterns,” Mueller & Kirkpatrick, 
Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11 (emphasis added), or “a 
collection  of conduct” engaged in by a typical offender , Robbie, 
112 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 484  (emphasis added).  Although there may 
be differences between profile evidence based on behaviors 
rather than on demographic or immutable personal 
characteristics, both types of  profile evidence present a 
serious risk of bolstering the complaining witness’ s credibility 
and invading the province of the jury.  This is particularly 
                                                        
 14  See also  supra Part II.A. (defining profile evidence as evidence 
of the behaviors and characteri stics of a typical offender, discussing its 
inherently prejudicial nature, and analyzing cases from multiple 
jurisdictions that have determined profile evidence to be inadmissible in 
sexual abuse cases).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 41 true where, as was the case here, the profile behaviors 
testified to by the expert provided nearly an exact match to the 
child complainant’s testimony.  Thus, the fact that the profile 
evidence contained in Dr. Bivens’ abuse process testimony was 
derived from behaviors rather than demographic characteristics 
is of no import  in regard to its classification and its 
underlying nature as inherently  prejudicial profile evidence .15 
  Instead of  identifying extensive portions of Dr. 
Bivens’ testimony as improper profile evidence, the majority 
finds that Dr. Bivens’ testimony on the abuse process was 
admissible because it touched on the “behavior exhibited by some 
offenders and the ways in which children react to that 
behavior.”  Majority at 3 6.  The majority elaborates that 
testimony on child sexual abuse will “inevitably make reference” 
to both vi ctim and abuser, and  it further argues  that the fact 
that “expert testimony describes the behavior of child sex abuse 
offenders does not automatically render the testimony 
inadmissible.”  Majority at 39. 
  However, Dr. Bivens’ abuse process testimony 
predominantly centered  on the conduct and thought processes of 
                                                        
 15 As additional support for its argument that Dr. B ivens’ testimony 
was not profile evidence, the majority states that the prosecution “did not 
argue in closing that McDonnell was a child molester because he had certain 
characteristics or exhibited certain behaviors.”  Majority at 39.  However, 
the prosecution need not identify testimony as “profile evidence” for it to 
be, in fact, such evidence.  Further, the admissibility of evidence does not 
depend on how the State characterizes it in closing argument.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 42 the typical offender  as related by child sex ual abusers.  
Although  the testimony may have inferentially provided 
information on how a child sex ual abuse victim responds to an 
offender’s actions, Dr. Bivens’ description of the abuse process 
unquestionably  focused on “convicted molesters themselves . . . 
describing how t hey go about doing the abuse.”  
  Further, the mere fact that expert testimony may 
reference  the general ways in which children reac t to abuse does 
not render testimony regarding the abuse process  categorically 
or presumptively admissible.   Although the Batangan  court deemed 
admissible evidence  of the behavior of child sex ual abuse 
victims that would otherwise be “attributed to inaccuracy or 
prevarication” and reflect poorly on a complaining witness’s 
credibility , the court emphasized that “[t]he pertinent 
consideration is whether the expert testimony will assist the 
jury without unduly pre judicing the defendant .”  71 Haw. at 558, 
799 P.2d at 52  (emphasis added) .  In this case, t he expert 
testimony regarding  the abuse process overwhelmingly centered on 
the molester’s behaviors and thought processes, was relayed from 
the molester’s point of v iew, and only tangentially referred to 
behaviors of child victims that could be “attributed to  
inaccuracy or prevari cation.”  Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51 .  
These aspects of Dr. Bivens’ abuse process testimony are highly ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 43 significant  in conducting an analysis of probative value versus 
risk of unfair prejudice under HRE Rule 403.  
  The majority  asserts, however,  that the need for 
evidence on the abuse process was “strong” in this case  and that 
the testimony was “highly p robative of Minor’s credibility,” 
thus suggest ing that the probative value of th e testimony would 
not be substantially outweighed by the risk of unfair prejudice 
under HRE Rule 403.  Majority at 36, 38.  Specifically, the 
majority contends that “there was no other evidence available to 
explain Minor’s behavior of not actively resisting the abuse, 
and indeed, seemingly acquiescing by engaging in a pattern of 
trading sexual contact for things she wanted.”  Majority at 36.  
The majority also analogi zes Dr. Bivens’ statements to expert 
testimony on delayed and inconsistent reporting of child sexual 
abuse victims and to expert testimony on recantations of abuse 
by domestic violence victims .  See Batangan , 71 Haw. at 557, 799 
P.2d at 51; State v. Clark , 83 Hawai i 289, 298 -99, 926 P.2d 194, 
203-04 (1996)  (permitting an expert in domestic violence to 
testify that victims of domestic violence commonly recant their 
allegations against their accuser ). 
  The majority’s analysis is problematic for several 
reasons.  First, as discussed above, although Dr. Bivens’ abuse 
process testimony included tangential references to the behavior ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 44 of victims,16 this portion of the testimony indisputably focused 
on the behavioral patterns specific to a “typical offender .”  
See Mueller & Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11.  
Indeed, the references to victim s’ responses to typical molester 
conduct were overwhelmingly relayed from the viewpoint of the 
perpetrator.  T he majority gives little consideration  to the 
inherently and unfairly  prejudicial nature of these aspects of 
Dr. Bivens’ testimony , which identifie d sets of observable 
behavioral patterns  specific to a “typical offender” and was 
used against McDonnell as  evidence of substantive guilt.  Any 
balancing analysis assessing  profile evidence under HRE Rule 403 
must account for the high risk of unfair prejudice resulting 
from such evidence, and, given the nature of the profile 
evidence in this case, HRE Rule 403 required its exclusion for 
the reaso ns discussed .17  Second, the scope of Dr. Bivens’ abuse 
                                                        
 16 See Batangan , 71 Haw. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51; Clark, 83 Hawai i at 
298-99, 926 P.2d at 203 -04. 
 17 Even if a court determines that expert testimony containing 
characteristics and behaviors of a typical offender is admissible under HRE 
Rule 403, the court would be requi red to give a limiting instruction to the 
jurors informing them that the testimony may only be used to assist their 
understanding of the complaining witness’s testimony and may not be used as 
evidence of the defendant’s guilt.  See HRE Rule 105 (1993) (aut horizing the 
court to issue a limiting instruction upon request when the jury is 
authorized to consider evidence for one purpose but not another); State v. 
Murray, 116 Hawai i 3, 18-19, 21, 169 P.3d 955, 970 -71, 973 (2007) (stating 
that a limiting instruct ion pursuant to HRE Rule 105 may be necessary “to 
prevent potential prejudice to a defendant” and concluding that although the 
defendant did not request such an instruction, the trial court erred in 
failing to instruct the jury that certain evidence could only be relied on 
for a limited purpose); see also  United States v. Lui , 941 F.2d 844, 847 -48 
(9th Cir. 1991) (district court abused its discretion when it admitted 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 45 process testimony was far broader than reasonably necessary to 
explain Minor’s behavior of acquiescing to the abuse.  Rather 
than detail ing at length how “convicted molesters” “describ[e] 
how they go a bout doing the abuse,” Dr. Bivens could have simply 
testified that it is not uncommon for victims of child sex ual 
molestation  to not resist  the abuse.  
  Finally, the majority submits that other jurisdictions 
have found expert testimony on the “phenomena of child abuse” to 
be admissible, and it points to several decisions in which 
courts have concluded that such testimony is admissible as 
evidence relating to the modus operandi of criminal offenders .  
See United States v. Long, 328 F.3d  655, 666 -67 (D.C. Cir. 2003) 
(determining that expert testimony on the  common characteristic s 
and patterns of sexual abuse offenders was admissible as modus 
operandi evidence) ; United States v. Ro mero, 189 F.3d 576, 584 -
87 (7th Cir. 1999)  (same); United States  v. Hayward , 359 F.3d 
631, 636 -37 (3rd Cir. 2004)  (same).  Majority at 40—41. 
  Although evidence of an individual’s prior acts are 
generally prohibited as evidence of  a propensity to engage in 
certain criminal behaviors , see supra note 5, the Hawai i Rules 
                                                                               
(. . . continued)  
prejudicial drug courier profile evidence as substantive evidence of 
defendant’s guilt and failed to provide the jurors with a “limiting 
instruction to prevent them from using the profile evidence as a basis for 
finding guilt”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 46 of Evidence permit the use of modus operandi testimony regarding 
a prior act, crime, or wrong in order to prove that the same 
individual committed the act at issue in the present litigation.  
See HRE Rule 404(b)  (1993); see also  Bowman, supra, § 404-
3[2][E] (noting that modus operandi testimony “typically ‘goes 
to identity’” (quoting State v. Veikoso , 126 Hawaii 267, 277, 
270 P.3d  997, 1007 (2011))).  Evidence of m odus operandi  
includes proffers where the features and methods attendant to a 
prior act are so “strikingly similar ” to those of the act being 
litigated that a reasonable inference could be made that both 
were committed by the same individual.  Bowman, supra, § 404-
3[2][E] (quoting HRE Rule 404 c mt.).  The admission of evidence 
under the modus operandi exception requires “much more  . . . 
than crimes of the same class, such as armed robberies of 
banks,” and “[t] he similarities must be ‘so unusual and 
distinctive as to be like a signature.’”  Bowman, supra, § 404-
3[2][E] (first quoting HRE Rule 404 cmt.;  then quoting  
McCormick , Evidence  190 (2d ed. 1972 )). 
  In Romero, for example,  expert testimony on the 
methods of “modern child molesters” was deemed admissible as 
evidence of modus operandi.  189 F.3d at 585.  According to the 
Romero court, the testimony constituted  evidence of modus 
operandi because it “was helpful to the jury in understand ing 
how child molesters operate --something with which most jurors ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 47 would have little experience. ”  Id.  However, c haracterizing 
such testimony as  evidence of  modus operandi is contrary to its 
application under Hawaii law.  See HRE Rule 404 cmt. 
(identify ing modus operan di evidence as “a species of ‘identity’ 
proof” and noting that “ the characteristics and methodology of 
the prior crime or act may be so strikingly similar to those of 
the crime or act being litigated as to support the inference 
that both were the han diwork of the very same person”).  
  In this case, Dr. Bivens’ expert testimony on the 
abuse process did not s eek to prove that a prior sex ual offense 
and the abuse of the complaining witness were “the handiwork of 
the very same person.”  Bowman, supra, § 404-3[2][E] (quoting 
HRE Rule 404 cm t.).  Instead, Dr. Bivens’ testimony sought to  
identify the behaviors of a class of typica l offenders to prove 
the guilt of a  defendant  who is constitutionally presumed 
innocent .  Thus, admission of Dr. Bivens’ abuse process 
testimony as evidence of modus operandi is inconsistent with 
this jurisdictio n’s application of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
with regard to  such evidence.  
  Further, even if  the modus operandi exception of HRE 
Rule 404(b) were transformed by this court to expansively 
encompass behavioral patterns not of the same person but of the 
“typical child molester ,” expert testimony on the behaviors of 
offenders in the abuse process would not be helpful to the jury ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 48 under the circumstances of this case.  For example, one of the 
most common types of expert testimony used to establish modus 
operandi is drug courier profile evidence.  See generally  United 
States v. Lim , 984 F.2d 331, 335 (9th Cir. 1993)  (discussing the 
use of drug courier profile evidence).  Such testimony “can 
describe historical background and patterns of organized crime 
in a relevant geographic area[] that can help appraising a 
series of criminal acts that would otherwise lack the con text 
that is necessary for a complete understanding.”  Mueller & 
Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:9.   Although drug 
courier profile evidence has been deemed admissible on the basis 
that it assists the jury in understanding how a series of 
seemingl y innocuous behaviors may  in fact be a criminal act, the  
acts constituting the sexual abuse as alleged by the complaining 
witness in this case do not require context for an understanding 
of their illegality.  
  Moreover, evidence of modus operandi admitted under 
HRE Rule 404( b) requires a n assessment of probative value versus 
risk of unfair prejudice under HRE Rule 403.  See, e.g. , State 
v. Renon , 73 Haw. 23, 31 -32, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992) ( when 
evidence of prior bad acts  is determined to be relevant, the 
court must then balance the evidence’s  probative value against 
its “prejudicial impact” under HRE Rule 403) ; State v. Basham , 
132 Hawai i 97, 114, 319 P.3d 1105, 1122 (2014)  (same).  Thus, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 49 even assuming that the modus operandi exception of HRE Rule 
404(b) could be inordinately  extended to encompass the profile 
evidence contained in Dr. Bivens’ testimony, the testimony would 
nonetheless be subject to and excluded by the balancing required 
under HRE Rule 403 for the reasons stated. 
  Finally, the majority  characterizes the position of 
this opinion as arguing for a “blanket prohibition on expert 
testimony regarding the behavior of child sexual abuse 
offenders.”  Majority at 4 0.  However, as stated, evidence 
objected to on the basis that HRE Rule 403 mandates its 
exclusion requires  the trial court to conduct a considered 
balancing of the evidence’s probative value and risk of unfair 
prejudice.   This balancing must be informed by “the particular 
circumstances” of each case, State v. Hern , 133 Hawaii 59, 65, 
323 P.3d 1241, 1247 (App. 2013), and the court must not rely on 
“any inflexible [blanket] policy” in determining admissibility , 
State v. Martin , 56 Haw. 292, 294, 535 P.2d 127, 128 (1975).   
However, i n conducting this analysis as applied to proffered  
expert testimony on child sexual abuse, the court must be wary 
of the high risk of unfair prejudice which is inherent in ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 50 evidence of the typical behaviors and characteristics of child  
sexual abuse offenders .18 
III. CONCLUSION  
  The profile evidence admitted in this case was a near 
identical match  to the complaining witness’s testimony regarding 
the sexual abuse alleged and demonstrates the inherent dangers 
of admitting such evidence against a  defendant.  The evidence  
created an extreme risk that the jury would improperly conclude 
that Minor must be telling the truth based on Dr. Bivens’ 
                                                        
 18 The majority further contends that other jurisdictions have 
upheld the admission of expert testimony on the child s exual abuse process 
“as more probative than prejudicial.”  Majority at 4 0.  Of the decisions 
cited by the majority in support of this proposition, only three reference 
the relevant testimony’s probative worth and risk of unfair prejudice.  In 
State v. Stafford , the court deemed evidence of typical behaviors of child 
sexual abuse offenders “relevant” because it was used to rebut the 
defendant’s defense at trial that his conduct “was not intended as grooming 
behavior”; the court did not, however, address the possible prejudice arising 
from the testimony.  972 P.2d 47, 52 (Or. 1998).  The court in Long likewise 
rejected the possibility that such testimony was unduly prejudicial, but on 
grounds that did not speak to the testimony’s unfairly prejudicial natur e.  
328 F.3d at 668 (noting that the testimony was “offered for a permissible 
purpose,” that the prosecution “adduced considerable other evidence of [the 
defendant’s] pedophilia,” that the jury was instructed to independently 
determine the testimony’s weig ht, and that a lack of statistics included in 
the testimony was of no import).  Similarly, in Perez v. State , the court 
simply noted that “[a]s to unfair prejudice,” the testimony “did not stray 
beyond the bounds set by this court and other jurisdictions f or expert 
testimony,” and it further stated that the expert “did not offer an opinion 
as to the victim’s credibility or express a belief that she had been abused.”  
313 P.3d 862, 868 -69 (Nev. 2013).  
  While it is true that some courts have admitted expert testimony 
on child sexual abuse over objections based on unfair prejudice, the 
decisions cited by the majority contain, at best, only a superficial analysis 
of the unfairly prejudicial nature of the testimony.  It is imperative under 
our jurisprudence, how ever, that a trial court conduct a thorough inquiry 
into the relative probative value of the testimony as measured against its 
risk of unfair prejudice in light of the particular facts in a given case.  
Therefore, the majority’s reliance on these cases is misplaced.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 51 descriptions of the typical behaviors of a child molester , which 
were supported by studies and statistics.   The use of profile 
evidence  also redirected the focus away from “individual guilt” 
and towards “‘the sort of person’ that certain beh avioral 
patterns ” describe as typical of child sex ual abusers.   Mueller 
& Kirkpatrick, Federal Evidence , supra, § 7:11.  Just as our 
courts would be hesitant to allow evidence of prior acts to 
demonstrate a defendant’s propensity in a child sex ual abuse 
case, we should also not permit  evidence that seeks to link the  
prior acts of other offenders, as collected by psychological 
studies,  to prove a particular defendant’s guilt.   In light  of 
the high risk of unfair prejudice that resulted from the 
admission of the profile evidence  in this case , its exclusion 
was required under HRE Rule 403.  Permitting the admission of 
such profile evidence under the guise of this court’s decision 
in State v. Batangan , 71 Haw. 552, 799 P.2d 48 (1990) , 
constitutes  an unwarranted and unwise expansion of the ruling in 
that case . 
  The conviction in this case sh ould therefore be 
vacated on two grounds.  F irst, the family court abdicated its 
discretion in analyzing and ruling on the admissibility of Dr. 
Bivens’ testimony under HRE Rule 403, critically depriving 
McDonnel l of that to which he was statutorily entitled: an 
informed discretionary ruling that balanced the probative value ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 52 of Dr. Biven s’ testimony against its unfair ly prejudicial 
effect.  Second, the family court’s indiscriminate admission of 
the entirety of Dr. Biven s’ testimony , which focused in large 
part on the behaviors and thought processes of typic al child 
molesters, was unfairly prejudicial to McDonnel l and deprived 
him of a fair trial .19  Accordingly, I dissent.  
 
  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
                                                        
 19 The family court’s errors in failing to conduct the balancing 
required by HRE Rule 403 and in admitting Dr. Bivens’ testimony in its 
entirety were not harmless.  As noted by Judge Reifurth in his concurring and 
dissenting opinion in this case , “the evidence against McDonnell was not 
overwhelming.”  At trial, the State presented no witnesses who observed the 
abuse, and its case depended almost entirely on the credibility of Minor.  
Given the enhancement of Minor’s credibility by the perfect mat ch between her 
allegations and the “typical” abuse process, as testified to by an expert 
witness “in the dynamics of child sexual abuse,” there is a “reasonable 
possibility” that the court’s errors regarding the admission of Dr. Bivens’ 
testimony contribut ed to McDonnell’s conviction.  State v. Pauline , 100 
Hawaii 356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002) (quoting State v. White , 92 Hawai i 
192, 198, 990 P.2d 90, 96 (1999)).  
