***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
DANE S. FIELD, TRUSTEE OF THE BANKRUPTCY ESTATE OF ALOHA SPORTS 
INC., Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant , 
 
vs. 
 
THE NATIONAL COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION, AN UNINCORPORATED 
ASSOCIATION, Respondent /Defendant- Appellee. 
 
 
SCWC-15-0000663 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15 -0000663; CIV NO. 06- 1-1832) 
 
NOVEMBER 20, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, 
POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J . 
  This case arises out  of the uncompleted sale of one 
business to another.  The p laintiff alleges that the defendant 
engaged in an unfair method of competition to terminate the 
transaction in violation of 
Hawaii antitrust law.  At issue in 
this case is what a plaintiff must demonstrate to  withstand 
summary judgment on a claim for an unfair method of competition Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000663
20-NOV-2018
10:04 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 480.  In particular, 
we address the plaintiff’s requirement of showing that the 
defendant’s conduct would negatively affect competition or harm 
fair competition.  Consistent with our case law , we conclude 
that to raise an issue of material fact as to the nature of 
competition requirement of a n unfair method of competition claim 
following the close of discovery,  a plaintiff must demonstrate 
that the defendant’s alleged anticompetitive conduct could 
negatively affect competition but need not prove that the 
defendant in fact harmed competition.  Further, we reaffirm that 
in order to withstand summary judgment, a plaintiff may 
generally describe the relevant market without resort to expert 
testimony and the plaintiff need not be a competitor of or in 
competition with the defendant.   
 BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY I.
A. Factual Background 
  The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) is 
a non-profit, unincorporated voluntary association of 
approximately 1,200 colleges and universities, athletic 
conferences,  and sports organizations.  The  NCAA regulates and 
controls Division I- A postseason college football bowl games in 
which qualifying NCAA Division I- A members may participate.  
Independent businesses (bowl sponsoring agencies) organize and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 promote the bowls subject to annual recertification1 by the NCAA 
Football Certification Subcommittee (the Subcommittee).  The 
Subcommittee is compo sed of representatives from NCAA member 
schools, as well as NCAA staff that serv e as non-voting 
liaisons.   
 
 Aloha Sports, Inc.2 (Aloha Sports) is a former bowl 
sponsoring agency that produced Division I- A NCAA postseason 
college football bowl games.  Aloha Sports organized, produced, 
and promoted the NCAA-certified Aloha Bowl in Honolulu from 1982 
to 2000.  In 1998, Aloha Sports established and received NCAA 
certification of the Oahu Bowl and began to 
promote the two bowl 
games together.  For various reasons unrelated to this appeal, 
Aloha Sports relocated 
both bowls to the continental United 
States following the 2000 season.  In the 2001 season, Aloha 
Sports sought and received NCAA recertification of the Aloha 
Bowl as the San Francisco Bowl and of the Oahu Bowl as the 
                     
 1 The requirements for certification listed in the 2002 -03 NCAA 
Bowl Handbook include, inter alia, exceeding a minimum amount of ticket 
sales, the implementation of a gross receipt sharing policy under which the 
institutions participating in the bowl each receive a minimum payout of 
$750,000, the performance of financial audits, the submission of a letter of 
credit, and compliance with certification application dates, fees, and 
procedures.   
 2 On December 27, 2017, the ICA issued an order granting Aloha 
Sports, Inc.’s motion to substitute Dane S. Fi eld, Trustee of the Bankruptcy 
Estate of Aloha Sports, Inc., for Aloha Sports , Inc. as plaintiff -appellant.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 Seattle Bowl.  The Seattle Bowl was also recertified by the NCAA 
and presented by Aloha Sports during the 2002 season. 
  S everal concerns arose  with the management of the 2002 
Seattle Bowl, including failures  to timely submit a letter of 
credit to the NCAA and  to make outstanding payments to 
participating teams and vendors.   Subsequently, Aloha Sports 
decided to sell its business.  In  February 2003, Aloha Sports 
signed a letter of intent to transfer ownership and control of 
its business to Pro Sports & Entertainment, Inc. (Pro Sports) 
for the sum of $2,031,000.  The sale was contingent upon NCAA 
recertification of the Seattle Bowl for the 2003 season.  On 
April 1, 2003, Aloha Sports submitted an application for 
recertification of the Seattle Bowl for the 2003 season to the 
NCAA.   
  In April 2003,  the Subcommittee met over four days to 
make certification decisions for the 2003 season.  At an unknown 
date, an  NCAA internal memorandum titled “Seattle Bowl Issues” 
was created that provided information regarding the pending 
Seattle Bowl recertification.  The memorandum stated that 
ongoing issues existed with the management of the Seattle Bowl, 
including a submission of an inaccurate audit report, a failure 
to pay the required certification fee, and a late letter of 
credit.  The memorandum also noted the intended  sale of Aloha ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5 Sports to Pro Sports, including that the sale was contingent 
upon recertification of the 2003 Seattle Bowl, and listed 
outstanding debts from the 2002 Seattle Bowl as “Feller Debts” 
in apparent reference  to the president of Pro Sports, Paul 
Feller.  Finally, under a section titled “Penalties” it stated 
“1) Withhold certification one year.  2) Impose financial 
penalty -  fine up to 50% of gross receipts.”  
  Paul Feller attended the Subcommittee certification 
meeting as a potential purchaser of Aloha Sports, along with 
James Haugh, president of Aloha Sports and executive director of 
the Seattle Bowl.  Terry Daw, owner of Aloha Sports , also 
participated by phone during the portions of the meeting related 
to the Seattle Bowl.  In a discussion regarding the Seattle 
Bowl’s recertification, Pro Sports presented the Subcommittee 
with information regarding Pro Sports ’ plan for  addressing  
outstanding issues from the 2002 Seattle Bowl, as well as the 
company’s financial  capacity and relevant experience with event 
management and promotion.  During that meeting, Dennis Poppe, an 
NCAA staff liaison to the Subcommittee, expressed concerns about 
Daw’s prior  management of the Seattle Bowl and sought assurance 
that Daw would not be involved after a transfer of Aloha Sports 
to Pro Sports.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6   In a second meeting, Poppe and members of the 
Subcommittee informed Feller, Haugh, and Daw3 that the 
Subcommittee had decided to decertify the Seattle Bowl.  Haugh 
was then asked to leave the room, and Feller was privately 
informed by Poppe and the Subcommittee members that Pro Sports 
could independently submit an application to certify the Seattle 
Bowl for the 2004 season.  
 
 The Subcommittee’s decision to decertif y the Seattle 
Bowl was formally announced the following day.4  Following the 
announcement, Aloha Sports requested that the NCAA instead place 
the Seattle Bowl on one- year probation as it had done with two 
other bowl games that had failed to submit timely letters of 
credit.  
The NCAA rejected Aloha Sports’ request , and the 
Seattle Bowl was decertified as announced. 
 
 At the time, the NCAA’s Postseason Handbook contained 
conflicting provisions concerning the consequences of  a 
sponsoring agency’s nonfulfillmen t of certification 
requirements.  A new provision added in the 2002-03 Handbook 
stated, “If a sponsoring agency fails to meet the certification 
                     
 3 Daw again participated in the meeting by phone.  
 4 An NCAA press release regarding the Subcommittee’s decisions for 
the 2003 season bowls provided: “The committee did not recertify the Seattle 
Bowl, due to financial issues and failure to adhere to administrative 
requirements.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 requirements, it shall  be placed on probation for one year.  If 
the sponsoring agency has not complied with the requirements by 
the end of the probationary  period, the bowl shall lose its 
certification.”5  (Emphasis added .)  The provision was also 
included nearly verbatim in two locations on the 2003 bowl 
recertification application form and in a November 18, 2002 
memorandum sent to all executive directors of bowl games.  The 
Handbook also retained a provision from previous years, however,  
which stated as follows: 
If the management of a certified game fails to comply with 
Bylaw 30.9, the requirement for an audited financial report 
for the immediate past game, or the NCAA’s approved 
policies and procedures, the subcommittee has the option to 
withhold certification for the postseason bowl game for one 
year or fine it a percentage of its gross receipts, not to 
exceed 50 percent, from the contest involved in the 
noncompliance, with the amount to be determined by it and 
approved by the Division I Championships/Competition 
Cabinet.
 
  As a result of the NCAA’s decertification of the 
Seattle Bowl, the sale of Aloha Sports to  Pro Sports  was not 
completed and the 2003 Seattle Bowl was not held.  On October 
20, 2005, Aloha Sports filed a complaint and demand for jury 
trial against the NCAA in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court).   
                     
 5 In the version of the Handbook released the following year, the 
provision was revised to state, “If a sponsoring agency fails to meet the 
certification requirements, it may either be put on probation for one year or 
be decertified for the next bowl season.”  (Emphasis added)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 B. 2005 -2013 Court Proceeding s 
  In its second amended complaint, 
Aloha Sports alleged 
four causes of action, including multiple  unfair method of 
competition violations  under HRS § 480- 2 (1993 & Supp. 2002),6 
tortious interference with prospective economic advantage, and 
two breach of contract claims.7  Aloha Sports contended that the 
NCAA violated HRS § 480- 2’s prohibition o n unfair methods of 
competition by, inter alia, “refusing to permit a transfer of 
ownership of Plaintiff’s NCAA Certified Postseason Footbal l Bowl 
Games without good cause ” (UMOC claim).8 
                     
 6 HRS § 480-2 (2008) provides in relevant part as follows:  
(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce 
are unlawful.  
. . . 
(e) Any person may bring an action based on unfair methods 
of competition declared unlawful by this section.  
 7 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.  
 8 The other grounds alleged in the second amended complaint to be 
unfair methods of competition in violation of HRS § 480 -2 were as follows: 
(1) requiring Aloha Sports to pay $75,000 or 75% of gross bowl revenues in 
equal proportion to participating teams; (2) arbitrarily penalizing 
sponsoring agencies for not meeting the payout requirements; (3) 
discriminatorily withdrawing certification of the San Francisco Bowl, 
refusing to recertify the Aloha Bowl, and decertifying the Seattle Bowl 
despite substantial compliance with the requirements for maintaining 
certification and receiving recertification; (4) imposing upon Aloha Sports 
unreasonable and arbitrary standards of conduct,  and (5) terminating and 
refusing to renew Aloha Sports’ San Francisco and Seattle Bowls without good 
cause and in violation of the NCAA’s terms and standards applicable to all 
bowls.  These grounds are largely not relevant to this appeal, and all 
references to Aloha Sports’ UMOC claim refer to only the alleged HRS § 480 -2 
violation in Subsection 23(f) of the second amended complaint based on the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9   The NCAA filed a motion to dismiss the second amended 
complaint with prejudice, contending, among other things, that 
Aloha Sports did not plead sufficient facts to support its UMOC 
claim.  On February 26, 2008, the court 
entered an order 
granting in part and denying in part
 the NCAA’s motion , 
dismissing with prejudice the UMOC claim for the reason cited by 
the NCAA and dismissing several of Aloha Sports’ other claims 
for relief.  (Order Dismissing UMOC Claim).   
  The remaining claim s proceeded to jury trial in 
September 2011.9  On September 8, 2011, at a hearing on a motion 
in limine prior to trial, Aloha Sports indicated that the 
intentional interference with prospective economic advantage 
claim was the sole grounds upon which 
it wished to proceed, as 
the company did not 
believe it  was likely to prevail on its  
remaining claims (including  the alleged violations of HRS § 480-
2 that had not been previously dismissed).10   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
NCAA’s purported blocking of Aloha Sports’ transfer of ownership  to Pro 
Sports. 
 9 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided  over the jury trial , as 
well as a preceding motion granting Aloha Sports leave to file a third 
amended complaint excluding any claims related to the Aloha/San Francisco 
Bowl.  The third amended complaint otherwise was identical to the second 
amended complaint.  
 10 The transcript of the September 8, 2011 hearing reflects the 
following:  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10   On September 19, 2011, the jury returned a verdict in 
favor of the NCAA on Aloha Sports ’ claim for tortious 
interference with prospective business advantage.  On January 
12, 2012, the court entered final judgment in favor of the NCAA 
as to all claims. 
 The final judgment stated that the UMOC claim 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
[ALOHA SPORTS]: Correct. Just for the record, your Honor, 
the sole claim on which we ’re proceeding we can abandon all 
other claims which may have been pled. The sole claim in 
which we’ re proceeding is intentional interference with 
prospective business advantage. That's it. So all the 
antitrust claims, the franchise claims, the claim under 
480-2 all -- all are abandoned.  
. . .  
[ALOHA SPORTS]: Excuse me. We don ’t think on the record we 
can satisfy the test that the Hawaii Supreme Court 
established with the Davis case, which converted 480 -2 
which was a redundant antitrust statute, but I don't think 
we can do that, so that ’s- 
THE COURT: Right.  It makes it very, very difficult to 
satisfy proof especially without an expert.  
. . . 
[NCAA]: So it’s clear that the theory of contract based on 
the handbook is also out?  
[ALOHA SPORTS]: Correct. The singular claims prospective 
advantage.  
THE COURT: Right. That’s -- 
[NCAA]: So w e’re down to one cause of action interference 
with respective [sic] economic advantage.  
THE COURT: That’s correct.  
[NCAA]: And everything else is dismissed.  
THE COURT: That ’s correct. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 was dismissed with prejudice pursuant to the February 26, 2008 
order.  It further stated that claims in the second amended 
complaint that had been dismissed by the “2/28/08 Dismissal 
Order”11 but repeated in the third amended complaint were equally 
dismissed, and that Aloha Sports ’ “remaining” HRS ' 480-2 claims 
in the third amended complaint were dismissed with prejudice 
pursuant to Aloha Sports’ September 8, 2011 oral motion.    
  After unsuccessfully moving the court to vacate the 
final judgment and grant a new trial, Aloha Sports filed a 
notice of appeal from the final judgment and other orders in the 
case, including specifically from the Order Dismissing UMOC 
Claim.12   
  On October 30, 2013, the ICA issued a memorandum 
opinion.13  As to the dismissal of the UMOC claim, the ICA found 
that a factual basis for the claim could be discerned from the 
facts alleged in the second amended complaint.  Specifically, 
the ICA pointed to the complaint’s allegations that the “NCAA 
                     
 11 It appears that section 3 of the Final Judgment mistakenly refers 
to the “2/26/08 Dismissal Order” as the “2/28/08 Dismissal Order.”  
 12 Aloha Sports also appealed from the Order Granting in Part and 
Denying in Part Defendant The National Collegiate Athletic Association’s 
Motion for Attorneys’ Fees and Costs, Filed January 31, 2012 (Attorney’s Fee 
Order).   
 13 The ICA’s memorandum opinion c an be found at Aloha Sports Inc. v. 
NCAA, No. CAAP- 12-0000512, 2013 WL 5823893 (Haw. App. Oct. 30, 2013).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 knew about the pending sale to Pro Sports and the significance 
of certification to the pending transaction,” and that “the NCAA 
disrupted the transaction by encouraging Pro Sports to abandon 
the deal with Aloha and apply for a bowl game independent of 
Aloha.”  The ICA held that, if true, these alleged facts would 
be sufficient to establish that the NCAA 
employed an  unfair 
method of competition.  Accord ingly, the ICA vacated the Order 
Dismissing UMOC Claim and the circuit court’s January 12, 2012 
final judgment and remanded the case
 to the circuit court for 
further proceedings
.14   
C. Circuit Court Proceedings on Remand  
  
On remand, t he NCAA filed a motion for judgment on the 
pleadings, or in the alternative, a motion for summary judgment 
on the UMOC claim (Motion for Summary Judgment).15  The NCAA 
argued that the UMOC claim was barred by collateral estoppel 
because Aloha Sports relied on the same allegations underlying 
the UMOC claim to support its claim for tortious interference 
with prospective business advantage at the jury trial and the  
jury had decided these factual issues in the NCAA’s favor.  The 
                     
 14 The ICA also vacated the Attorney’s Fee Order and affirmed all 
other circuit court rulings at issue.  
 15 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto also presided over the circuit 
court proceedings on remand.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13 NCAA contended that, because th e facts were actually litigated, 
finally decided, and essential to the final judgment,  Aloha 
Sports should be estopped from relitigating them on remand.   
  The  NCAA also maintained that Aloha Sports was 
judicially estopped from pursuing the UMOC claim because at the 
motion in limine hearing on September 8, 2011, Aloha Sports 
abandoned all claims other than the claim for tortious 
interference with prospective business advantage and conceded it 
could not meet the burden of establishing a violation of HRS § 
480-2.  The NCAA asserted that (1) Aloha Sports ’ present 
position was factually incompatible with its prior position;  (2) 
the prior inconsistent position had been  accepted by the court; 
and (3) permitting Aloha Sports to continue to pursue the UMOC 
claim granted Aloha Sports an unfair advantage.   
  As to the merits of the UMOC claim, the NCAA argued 
that there was no dispute that the NCAA had legitimate business 
reasons not to certify the 
2003 Seattle Bowl, including the 2002 
Seattle Bowl’s untimely letter of credit and lack of payment to 
teams and local vendors.  The NCAA maintained that discovery had 
closed and Aloha Sports could not present any evidence that 
decertification was intended to induce Pro Sports to forgo the 
contemplated purchase of Aloha Sports.  Thus , the NCAA argued, 
Aloha Sports could not prove that it was harmed as a result of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 actions by the NCAA that negatively affected competition.   The 
NCAA also contended that it was entitled to summary judgment 
because Aloha Sports had not presented any facts demonstrating 
an anti-competitive impact on the bowl game market as a result 
of the NCAA’s alleged actions.   
  In its memorandum in opposition, Aloh a Sports 
responded that the UMOC claim was not barred by collateral 
estoppel because the jury made no specific findings of fact when 
it decided in the NCAA’s favor on the claim for interference 
with prospective economic advantage.  Additionally , Aloha Sports 
asserted, the elements of an  unfair method of competition claim 
are distinct from those of a claim for interference with 
prospective economic advantage.  Further, Aloha Sports argued, 
no final judgment existed for purposes of collateral estoppel 
because it had been vacated by the ICA decision .  The UMOC claim 
was also not barred by judicial estoppel, Aloha Sports 
contended, because the claim  had already been dismissed in 
February 26, 2008.  Therefore, Aloha Sports maintained, the 
claim could not have been abandoned or conceded at the September 
8, 2011 hearing.   
  Aloh a Sports also argued that it presented sufficient 
evidence demonstrating that the NCAA denied recertification of 
the 2003 Seattle Bowl in order to induce Pro Sports to abandon ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 its intent to purchase Aloha Sports.  Aloha Sports contended 
that, contrary to the NCAA’s assertion,  it did not need to prove 
that its injury resulted from actions by the NCAA that were 
harmful to competition
 to withstand summary judgment.   
  On June 9, 201
5, the circuit court issued an order 
granting summary judgment to the NCAA on the UMOC claim (Order 
Granting Summary Judgment)
.16  The court held that Aloha Sports 
was barred by waiver and judicial estoppel because Aloha Sports 
had implicitly surrendered the UMOC claim by its statements at 
the September 8, 2011 hearing.  The circuit court reasoned that 
the UMOC claim required proof of an additional element under 
this court’s precedents and thus would have been more difficult 
to prevail upon than the alleged HRS § 480
-2 violations that 
Aloha Sports expressly abandoned.  Aloha Sports therefore 
impliedly conceded that it was  unable to prove  the UMOC claim 
when it voluntarily dismissed its other HRS § 480- 2 claims, the 
court concluded.   
  The circuit court al
so held that Aloha Sports was 
collaterally estopped from proceeding on its UMOC claim.   The 
                     
 16 The full title of the court’s order is “Order Granting Defendant 
The National Collegiate Athletic Association’s Motion For Judgment On The 
Pleadings, Or In The Alternative, For Summary Judgment On The Sole  Remaining 
Claim For Unfair Competition Alleged In Plaintiff’s Third Amended Complaint, 
Filed May 27, 2011, Filed September 25, 2014  [Civ. No. 06-1- 1832-10 (June 9, 
2015)].” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 court stated that, because Aloha Sports had not alleged one of 
the specific violations of HRS § 480- 2(a) identified by statute, 
it fell to the court to identify the elements that must be 
satisfied to establish an unfair method of competition in this 
case.  The court determined that the alleged unfair method of 
competition-- the NCAA’s interfer ence with Aloha Sports’ transfer 
to Pro Sports-- was essentially a claim for tortious interference 
with prospective business advantage, and HRS § 480 -2(a) 
therefore incorporated the elements of a tortious interference 
claim.  Accordingly, the circuit court found that proving facts 
establishing  tortious interference was a prerequisite to proving 
that the NCAA derivatively violated HRS § 480- 2.  Because the 
jury had entered a verdict in favor of the NCAA on the tortious 
interference claim and a final judgment had been issued, the 
court concluded that Aloha Sports could not now proceed on an 
unfair method of competition claim based on the same alleged 
conduct.  
  The court further held that the NCAA  had successfully 
demonstrated that it acted with a legitimate business purpose in 
denying the recertification of the 2003 Seattle Bowl , that Aloha 
Sports did not submit any evidence showing that the NCAA acted 
in an anticompetitive manner, and that Aloha Sports did not 
demonstrate that its injury resulted from the NCAA’s alleged ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 anticompetitive conduct.  F inal judgment was entered in favor of 
the NCAA on August 11, 2015,17 from which Aloha Sports appealed 
to the ICA. 
D. Second ICA Appeal  
  
On October 30, 2017 , the ICA issued a Summary 
Disposition Order affirming the circuit court’s grant of summary 
judgment in favor of the NCAA.18  The ICA held that Aloha Sports 
failed to present any evidence that the NCAA’s alleged conduct 
affected competition, which was needed to satisfy the nature of 
competition requirement of a claim for an unfair method of 
competition in violation
 of HRS § 480-2 (a).  Specifically, the 
ICA held that Aloha Sports failed to (1) specify the relevant 
market; (2) provide evidence of the anticompetitive effect of 
the NCAA’s conduct on that market; and (3) demonstrate how Aloha 
Sports, a bowl-sponsoring agency, was in competition with the 
NCAA.  Further, the ICA stated that
, in order to prove an 
anticompetitive effect, it was not sufficient for Aloha Sports 
to prove harm to its individual business.  Rather, Aloha Sports 
                     
 17 The final judgment also included an order granting in part and 
denying in part a motion for reinstatement of the Attorney’s Fee Order, filed 
August 4, 2015 (Order to Reinstate Attorney’s Fee Order).   
 18 The ICA’s SDO can be found at Aloha Sports Inc. v. The NCAA , NO. 
CAAP-15-0000663, 2017 WL 4890131 (Haw. App. Oct. 30, 2017), as corrected
(Jan. 11, 2018).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 was required to demonstrate an adverse impact to competitive 
conditions generally within the commercial field in which it was 
engaged.   
  Additionally, the ICA held that the NCAA’s conduct was 
not an unfair competitive act because the 2001- 02 Handbook 
allowed for decertification of a non- compliant bowl, and the 
NCAA demonstrated that Aloha Sports had not complied with 
certification requirements pertaining to the 2002 Seattle Bowl.19   
  Based on its holdings regarding the UMOC claim, the 
ICA did not reach the other reasons cited by the circuit court 
for granting summary judgment--waiver, judicial estoppel, and 
collateral estoppel.  The ICA thus affirmed the circuit court’s 
ruling granting NCAA summary judgment on the UMOC claim.20   
  
Aloha Sports timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari from the ICA’ s January 24, 2018 J udgment on A ppeal, 
which this court granted.   
                     
 19 The ICA specifically cited the 2001 -02 Handbook in its SDO, which 
did not contain the conflicting provision added in the 2002 -03 Handbook that 
stated nonfulfillment of certification requirements would be punished by 
probation.  S ee supra text accompanying note 5.   
 20 The ICA also affirmed the “Judgment” entered on August 11, 2015; 
the Order to Reinstate Attorney’s Fees Order; and the Attorney’s Fee Order.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19  STANDARD OF REVIEW II.
  This court reviews a trial court’s grant or denial of 
summary judgment de novo.  Anastasi v. Fid. Nat’l  Title Ins.  
Co., 137 Hawai i 104, 112, 366 P.3d 160, 168 (2016) (citing 
Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawai i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004)). 
 DISCUSSION III.
  On certiorari, Aloha Sports contends that  the ICA 
erred in the evidence it required Aloha Sports to present to 
withstand summary judgment on its UMOC claim.  In light of our 
resolution of this issue, we also address the circuit court ’s 
alternative grounds for granting summary judgment, including 
that Aloha Sports’  claim was waived and that Aloha Sports was 
judicially and collaterally estopped from proceeding upon this 
claim.21  We evaluate each issue in light of the legal standard 
for summary judgment:22 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if . . . there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving 
                     
 21 Aloha Sports also challenges on certiorari the ICA’s affirmation 
of the circuit court’s Order to Reinstate Attorney’s Fees Order and the 
Attorney’s Fee Order.   
 22 In this case, the record indicates that the NCAA’s motion was 
filed after the close of discovery.  It is noted that the movant’s burden is 
generally greater when a party seeks summary judgment before discovery has 
concluded.  See Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawai‘ i 46, 48,  61, 292 P.3d 1276, 1278 , 
1291 (2013) (“[I]n general, a summary judgment movant cannot merely point to 
the non- moving party's lack of evidence to support its initial burden of 
production if discovery has not concluded.” (citing French v. Hawaii Pizza 
Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai‘ i 462, 472, 99 P.3d 1046, 1056 (2004))).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A fact 
is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of 
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a 
cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.  The 
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the 
non-moving party.  
Anastasi v. Fid. Nat’l  Title Ins. Co. , 137 Hawai i 104, 112, 366 
P.3d 160, 168 (2016) (quoting Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui , 116 
Hawai‘i 239, 254 –55, 172 P.3d 983, 998 –99 (2007)). 
A.  Evidence Necessary to Withstand Summary Judgment on an HRS 
§ 480-2 Unfair Method of C ompetition  Claim   
  Hawaii 's antitrust law,  codified in HRS Chapter 480,  
includes a general prohibition at HRS § 480- 2(a) stating that 
unfair methods of competition in t he conduct of any trade or 
commerce are unlawful.23  HRS § 480 -13 (1993 & Supp. 2002)24 in 
                     
 23 HRS § 480 -2 (2008) in relevant part provides as follows:  
(a)   Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce 
are unlawful.  
. . .  
(e)   Any person may bring an  action based on unfair 
methods of competition declared unlawful by this section.   
 24 HRS § 480 –13 provides in relevant part as follows:  
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), any person who 
is injured in the person's business or property by reason of
anything forbidden or declared unlawful by this chapter:   
(1) May sue for damages sustained by the person and, if the 
judgment is for the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be 
awarded a sum not less than $1,000 or threefold damages by 
the plaintiff sustained, whichever sum is the greater . . . 
.  
(Emphasis added.) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 turn establishes a private right of action to seek recovery for 
damages flowing from a party’s HRS Chapter 480 violation.    
  T o recover under HRS § 480- 13(a) for an unfair method 
of competition violation, a plaintiff must prove: (1) a 
violation of HRS Chapter 480; (2) an injury to the plaintiff ’s 
business or propert y that flows from the defendant’ s conduct 
that negatively affects competition or harms fair competition; 
and (3) proof of damages.  Gurrobat  v. HTH Corp.,  133 Hawai i 1, 
21, 323 P.3d 792, 812 (2014).  The second element has two parts.  
Id.  First, a plaintiff is required to 
demonstrate “an injury in 
fact to his or her ‘business or property.’”  Id.  Second, a 
plaintiff is required to show  the “nature of the competition. ” 
Id.  This latter requirement is met by demonstrating how the 
defendant’s conduct negatively affects competition or harms fair 
competition.  Id. at 22-23, 323 P.3d at 813- 14.   
  W e thus consider if Aloha Sports demonstrated a 
question of material fact as to the elements of its UMOC claim 
and whether the ICA imposed evidentiary requirements beyond what 
was required under our law.25  
                     
 25 In evaluating a motion for summary judgment, we apply a burden -
shifting framework under which the moving party bears the initial burden of 
demonstrating that no genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to 
the essential elements of the claim and that the undisputed facts entitle the 
party to judgment as a matter of law.  See Gurrobat v. HTH Corp. , 133 Hawai ‘i 
1, 14, 323  P.3d 792, 805 (2014).  Where, as here, the non -movant bears the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 1. First Element: Violation of HRS Chapter 480 
  
The first element for  recovery  under HRS § 480- 13(a) 
is proof of an HRS Chapter 480 violation.  HRS § 480-2(a) does 
not define unfair methods of competition, although a number of 
other statutes cross- reference the provision and specify that 
particular practices are per se violations of the prohibition.  
See, e.g., HRS § 480D-4(a) (2008); HRS § 481B
-4 (2008).  This 
court has recognized that the statutorily enumerated violations 
are not an exhaustive catalogue of conduct that violates HRS § 
480-2, as “[t] here is no limit to human inventiveness in this 
field.”  Cieri v. Leticia Query Realty, Inc. , 80 Hawai ‘i 54, 61, 
905 P.2d 29, 36 (1995) (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 55, in 
1965 House Journal, at 538).   
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
burden of proof at trial, the movant may meet its initial burden by either 
“(1) presenting evidence negating an element of the non -movant's claim, or 
(2) demonstrating that the non -movant will be unable to carry his or her 
burden of proof at trial.”  Ralston, 129 Hawai ‘i at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 1290-91 
(citing French, 105 Hawai ‘i at 470-72, 99 P.3d at 1054-56)).  “Only once the 
moving party has satisfied its initial burden of production does the  burden 
shift to the non- moving party to show specific facts that present a genuine 
issue for trial.”  Gurrobat , 133 Hawai‘ i at 14, 323 P.3d at 805. 
  In this case, the circuit court found that the NCAA had met its 
initial burden and that Aloha Sports then  failed to present sufficient 
evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact.  Because Aloha Sports’ 
arguments before this court focus on the sufficiency  of the evidence it 
presented, the circuit court’s finding that the NCAA met its initial burden 
appears to be uncontested.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23   The circuit court in this case stated that, because 
the unfair method of competition alleged here is not 
specifically defined by statute, it fell to the court to 
determine the appropriate elements of a HRS § 480- 2(a) violation 
in this context.  The court reasoned that the alleged offending 
conduct was essentially a claim for tortious interference with 
prospective business advantage, and thus it was necessary to 
prove the elements of the tort in order to prove a HRS § 480-
2(a) violation.   
  Under our preced
ents, however, the evaluation of 
whether particular, non- statutorily -enumerated conduct is unfair 
is simply a question of fact that does not require incorporating 
the elements of an analogous claim.  See Robert’s Hawaii School 
Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co. , 91 Hawai i 224, 239 , 982 
P.2d 853, 868 (1999), superseded by statute on other grounds .  
“[C]ompetitive conduct ‘is unfair when it offends established 
public policy and when the practice is immoral, unethical, 
oppressive, unscrupulous or substantially injurious to 
consumers.’”26  Id. at 255 n.34, 9 82 P.2d at  884 n.34 (quoting 
                     
 26 Although the standard to prove a HRS § 480- 2 violation  and the 
elements to establish a tortious interference with economic advantage may 
seem similar in that the latter requires that a plaintiff intended to either 
pursue “an improper objective of harming the plaintiff or use[] wrongful 
means,” Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med .  Serv. Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai ‘i 77, 
116, 148 P.3d 1179, 1218 (2006) (quoting Omega Envtl ., Inc. v. Gilbarco, 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 State ex rel. Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp. , 82 Hawaii 32, 51, 
919 P.2d 294, 313 (1996)).   The circuit court thus erred in 
finding that it was necessary for Aloha Sports to prove a claim 
for tortious interference with prospective business advantage in 
order to demonstrate a HRS § 480- 2(a) violation.   
  In its memorandum opinion addressing  Aloha Sports’ 
first appeal, the ICA rule d that Aloha Sports sufficiently 
alleged facts to discern a claim for which relief could be 
granted by alleging that the NCAA knew about Aloha Sports’ 
pending sale to Pro Sports and that the NCAA disrupted the 
transaction by encouraging Pro Sports to abandon the deal with 
Aloha Sports and apply for a bowl game independently of Aloha 
Sports. 
 
 On remand
, Aloha Sports substantiated its allegations 
of the NCAA’s knowledge  of the pending sale by providing 
evidence that the Subcommittee received information on Pro 
Sports’ qualifications to organize a nd promote the 2003 Seattle 
Bowl and to pay the 2002 Seattle Bowl debts.  Additionally, 
Aloha Sports submitted to the court the  NCAA’s internal “Seattle 
Bowl Issues” memorandum that stated that the sale of Aloha 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
Inc., 127 F.3d 1157, 116 6 (9th Cir. 1997)), the elements of the two claims 
are not identical.  See  infra, § III. C. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 Sports to Pro Sports was contingent upon recertification of the 
Seattle Bowl.  Aloha Sports also submitted evidence that the 
NCAA expressed concern that Aloha Sports’ Terry Daw would remain 
involved after the sale of Aloha Sports to Pro Sports, and that 
immediately after announcing the decertification of the Seattle 
Bowl, the NCAA’s  Dennis Poppe and the Subcommittee privately 
informed Feller, CEO of Pro Sports, that it coul d reapply 
independently for certification of the Seattle Bowl the 
following year.  Aloha Sports also provided evidence raising a 
question of fact as to whether the NCAA arbitrarily failed to 
apply its requirement for a one- year probation period prior to 
decertification of a bowl that was established for the 2002- 03 
season.   
  T his evidence, at a minimum, gives  rise to a question 
of material fact as to whether the NCAA unfairly decertified the 
2003 Seattle Bowl in order to disrupt the transaction between 
Aloha Sports and Pro Sports, which a jury could consider 
immoral, unethical, oppressive, unscrupulous or substantially 
injurious to consumers.   Thus, Aloha Sports demonstrated a 
factual dispute as to a violation of HRS § 480-2(a) by virtue of 
an unfair method of competition.  The circuit court therefore 
erred in concluding that summary judgment was warranted on this 
basis.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 2. Second Element: Injury & Nature of Competition 
a. Actual Harm to Competition Not Required to Withstand Summary 
Judgment 
  
To fulfill the second element of an unfair method of 
competition violation, a plaintiff must (a) demonstrate an 
injury in fact to one’s business and (b) demonstrate how a 
defendant’s conduct negatively affects  competition or harms  fair 
competition.  Gurrobat , 133 Hawai i at 21, 323 P.3d at 812.   
  As to the injury  requirement, t he injury in fact must 
flow from the anticompetitive conduct.  Id. at 23, 323 P.3d at 
814.  Aloha Sports meets the injury requirement because it 
presented evidence that as a result of the N CAA’s allegedly 
unfair decertification of the 2003 Seattle Bowl-- the NCAA’s 
allegedly anticompetitive conduct--Aloha Sports was unable to 
complete its sale to Pro Sports.   
  
Turning to the nature of the competition requirement, 
Aloha Sports contends that the ICA erred by holding that Aloha 
Sports was required to provide  evidence of anticompetitive 
effects within that market to withstand summary judgment.  In 
response, the NCAA maintains that the ICA correctly applied 
Hawaii and federal precedent to find that Aloha Sports did not 
meet its burden as to the nature of competition requirement. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27   W e recently addressed  a plaintiff’s burden when 
opposing summary judgment on an unfair method of competition 
claim in Gurrobat 
v. HTH Corporation , 133 Hawai i 1, 323 P.3d 792 
(2014).  In that case, service employees brought suit against 
the operators of hotels (hotels) for distributing to non- service 
employees a portion of the service charges it collected from 
customers without informing customers of the practice, in 
contravention of HRS § 481B- 14.  Id. at 16-17, 323 P.3d at 807-
08.  We found that a genuine issue of material fact existed as 
to the nature of competition requirement based upon evidence 
that the hotels’  non-compliance with the service -charge law 
allowed the hotel s to lower their overall price s and thereby 
obtain an “unfair and illegal business advantage” over compliant 
competitors.  Id.  at 22, 323 P.3d at 813.  Showing that the 
conduct of the hotels enabled them to create incentives for 
customers to choose their  services over compliant  competitors ʻ 
services was sufficient to demonstrate that their  conduct could 
have negatively affected competition and thus defend against 
summary judgment.  Id.; see Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med.  
Serv. Ass'n, Inc. , 113 Hawai i 77, 113, 148 P.3d 1179, 1215 
(2006).  It was not necessary for the plaintiffs to prove at a 
summary judgment proceeding that the hotels’ conduct had in fact 
harmed competition.
  See Gurrobat, 133 Hawai i at 22, 323 P.3d at ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 813.  Further, although the plaintiffs in Gurrobat  offered the 
evidence through expert testimony, we noted that expert 
testimony was not necessary to create a genuine issue of 
material fact regarding harm to competition sufficient to 
withstand summary judgment.  See id.  
  In this case, Aloha Sports set forth how the NCAA’s 
alleged anti -competitive conduct would negatively affect 
competition.  Aloha Sports contends that the NCAA’s 
decertification of the 2003 Seattle Bowl incentivized Pro Sports 
to abandon its agreement with Aloha Sports and to independently 
seek certification of a future Seattle Bowl through the NCAA.  
Cf. Gurrobat , 133 Hawai i at 22, 323 P.3d at 813 (“ plaintiffs may 
prove how a defendant’ s conduct negatively affects competition 
by showing that defendant’ s conduct enables the defendant to 
create incentives for customers to purchase banquet services 
from the defendant instead of competitors . . . .”) ; Hawaii Med.  
Ass'n, 113 Hawai i at 113, 148 P.3d at 1215 (holding that 
plaintiffs may demonstrate harm to competition by showing the 
defendant engaged in “ acts or practices that . . . create 
incentives for patients to look elsewhere ”).  Aloha Sports 
provided evidence that the NCAA no longer wished to deal with 
Aloha Sports’ management and that immediately after its 
decertification of the 2003 Seattle Bowl, the NCAA privately ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 informed Pro Sports that it could apply independently for 
certification of the Seattle Bowl in 2004.  If true, the NCAA’s 
conduct could be construed as wielding its power to ensure that 
it only deals with its staff’s preferred applicants rather than 
evaluating certification decisions in compliance with its 
established rules and procedures.   
  
It is reasonable to infer from this evidence that , as 
argued by Aloha Sports, the NCAA ’s allegedly arbitrar y 
certification decision could negatively affect competition by 
(1) restricting the transfer of ownership of bowl games 
contingent upon recertification; (2) leading to lower prices for 
the sale of bowl sponsoring agencies because of uncertainty as 
to whether a bowl will gain recertification; and (3) acting as a 
restriction on output that would result in a loss of financial 
benefits to schools and c
onsumers who would have otherwise 
participated in a given bowl.  [W]e must view all of the 
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom [] in the light most 
favorable to the party opposing the motion. ”  Anastasi , 137 
Hawai‘i at 112, 366 P.3d at  168 (emphasis added) (quoting Omerod, 
116 Hawai‘ i at 254–55, 172 P.3d at 998–99). 
 
 Taken together in the light most favorable to Aloha 
Sports, Aloha Sports has presented evidence raising  a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether the NCAA’s conduct could ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 negatively affect competition.  Thus, the ICA erred in holding 
that “Aloha [Sports] has failed to provide any evidence that the 
NCAA’s conduct negatively affected competition,” and that Aloha 
Sports did not raise an issue of material fact as to the “nature 
of competition” to substantiate its UMOC claim.  
  
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that Aloha Sports 
raised a genuine issue of material fact as to the second element 
of a HRS § 480-13(a) claim : an injury to the plaintiff ’s 
business or propert y that flows from the defendant’ s conduct 
that negatively affects competition or harms fair competition.27   
b. Proof of Relevant Market, Harm to 
Market as a Whole, and 
Competition with Defendant Not Required to Withstand Summary 
Judgment  
  In i ts analysis regarding the nature of competition 
requirement, the ICA held that  to withstand summary judgment, 
Aloha Sports needed to specify the relevant market and 
demonstrate that the alleged conduct affected that  market beyond 
an adverse effect on Aloha  Sports’ business.  The ICA also 
concluded that Aloha Sports was required to but failed to 
                     
 27 The third element is proof of damages.  Gurrobat, 133 Hawai i at 
23, 323 P.3d at 814.  Neither the circuit court in granting summary judgment 
nor the ICA in affirming the circuit court based its decision on the absence 
of a showing of proof of damages.  Accordingly, since this issue is 
undisputed and was not relied upon by the circuit court, we conclude that 
Aloha Sports raised a disputed fact as to this element also.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 demonstrate that it was a competitor of or in competition with 
the NCAA.   
  First, to defend against summary judgment,  it is 
sufficient for a plaintiff to offer proof of the general market 
at issue without resort to expert testimony.  In Gurrobat , the 
plaintiffs contended that the defendants ’ asserted unfair method 
of competition would reduce fair competition “in the market for 
hotels, restaurants, and banquet service providers” --those 
generally in the field of competition with the defendant.  133 
Hawaii at 22, 323 P.3d at 813.  We  did not require the 
plaintiffs to define the market with great specificity in order 
to raise a genuine issue of material fact.  Here, Aloha Sports 
presented sufficient evidence to discern the affected market by 
describing the NCAA’s certification process and the underlying 
competition among bowl sponsoring agencies vying for NCAA 
certification of bowl games, the member institutions that 
participate in the bowls, and the consumers that attend the 
bowls.   
 
 Second , the ICA overstate d the nature of competition 
requirement on summary judgment as necessitating proof that the 
defendant’s conduct in fact negatively affected  the market 
beyond Aloha Sports’ own injury .  As stated  in Gurrobat , 
demonstrating actual negative effects on or harm to fair ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 competition in the relevant market is not required.28  133 Hawai i 
at 22, 323 P.3d at 813 .   
  Finally, the ICA noted that Aloha Sports failed to 
demonstrate that it was in competition with the NCAA.  It is 
well settled, however, that plaintiffs need not be competitors 
or in competition with defendants to establish or recover from 
an unfair method of c ompetition  in violation of HRS § 480- 2(a).  
Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel Ltd. , 122 Hawai i 423, 435, 228 P.3d 
303, 315 (2010); Hawaii Med.  Ass'n, 113 Hawai i at 110, 148 P.3d 
at 1212; see also HRS § 480-2(e) (“Any  person may bring an 
action based on unfair methods of competition declared unlawful 
by this section.” (emphasis added)) .   
  Thus, the ICA erred in affirming summary judgment on 
the bases that (1) Aloha Sports “failed to specify the relevant 
market,” (2) Aloha Sports did not demonstrate harm to the 
market, and (3) Aloha Sports did not demonstrate that it was a 
competitor of or in competition with the NCAA.   
                     
 28 Additionally, the  U.S. Supreme Court has held that under federal 
anti-trust law, harm to a single business may suffice to establish an anti -
trust violation.  Klor's, Inc. v. Broadway -Hale Stores, Inc. , 359 U.S. 207, 
213 (1959) (“As such [a boycott by a combination of manuf actures and dealers]
is not to be tolerated merely because the victim is just one merchant whose 
business is so small that his destruction makes little difference to the 
economy. ”).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 B. Waiver and Judicial Estoppel  
  On remand, the circuit court held t
hat Aloha Sports 
was barred by waiver and judicial estoppel from asserting its 
UMOC claim based on Aloha Sports’  statement at a pre- trial 
hearing that it was solely preceding on its claim for 
interference with prospective business advantage and was 
abandoning all other claims.29 
  A waive r does not occur when  there is no right in 
existence to be waived.  See Coon v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 98 
Hawaii 233, 261, 47 P.3d 348, 376 (2002) (“To constitute a 
waiver, there must have existed a right claimed to have been 
waived and the waiving party must have had knowledge, actual or 
constructive, of the existence of such a right at the time of 
the purported waiver.”  (citations omitted)) .  Here, t he circuit 
court had dismissed Aloha Sports’ UMOC claim with prejudice 
three years prior to the 2011 pre- trial hearing whe n the 
purported waiver occurred.  Indeed, the circuit court ’s final 
judgment, filed January 12, 2012, distinguished between the 
                     
 29 As noted, the ICA did not address the circuit court’s holdings on 
waiver, judicial estoppel, or collateral estoppel.  However, the NCAA 
requested at oral argument that this court address these holdings if we were 
to conclude that there were disputed facts regarding the elements of a UMOC 
claim and that summary judgment had thus been improperly granted on this 
ground.  Oral Argument at 00:36:50, Field v. The NCAA  (No. SCWC- 15-663),  
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/18/SCOA_071918_SCWC_15_663.mp3 .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 claims dismissed in the Order Dismissing UMOC Claim and the 
“remaining claims,” which were dismissed by Al oha Sports ’ 
voluntary waiver at the pre- trial hearing.  Thus, unlike the 
claims that were voluntarily dismissed, Aloha Sports did not 
have a then-existing right to proceed on the UMOC claim when the 
2011 pre-trial hearing occurred.   
  In other words, prior to prevailing on its  appeal of 
the Order Dismissing UMOC Claim , Aloha Sports could not have 
proceeded on the dismissed claim before the circuit court and 
therefore could not waive that nonexistent right at the hearing.  
Therefore, the circuit court erred in finding that Aloha Sports 
had waived its UMOC claim.30    
  T he doctrine of judicial estoppel precludes a party 
from assuming a position that is inconsistent with a position 
already accepted by the court to gain an unfair advantage in the 
proceedings.  See Gurrobat v. HTH Corp. , 133 Hawai i 1, 20, 323 
P.3d 792, 811 (2014);  Roxas v. Marcos , 89 Hawai i 91, 124- 25, 969 
P.2d 1209, 1242-43 (1998).  The doctrine is intended to protect 
                     
 30 The circuit court held that Aloha Sports impliedly waived the 
UMOC claim at the pre -trial hearing because it was more difficult to prove 
than the other HRS § 480 -2 claims that it expressly waived.  Our precedent 
does not make a distinction between an implied and express waiver in this 
regard; without a then -existing right to proceed on the UMOC claim, Aloha 
Sports was not capable of waiving the claim by implication.  See Coon, 98 
Hawaii at 261, 47 P.3d at 376.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
35 the integrity of the judicial system and prevents parties from 
“playing ‘fast and loose’ with the court or blowing ‘hot and 
cold’ during the course of litigation, ” thereby promoting 
“orderliness, regularity, and expedition of litigation.”   
Gurrobat, 133 Hawai i at 20, 323 P.3d at 811 (quoting Rosa v. CWJ 
Contractors, Ltd.,  4 Haw. App. 210, 218–19, 664 P.2d 745, 751 
(1983)).  Because we hold that Aloha Sports did not waive its 
UMOC claim at the pre- trial hearing, Aloha Sports did not assume 
an inconsistent position by asserting its right to proceed on 
that claim.  Thus, Aloha Sports was not judicially estopped from 
raising the UMOC claim. 
  Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court erred in 
finding that waiver and judicial estoppel applied to preclude 
Aloha Sport’s assertion of its UMOC claim.   
C. Collateral Estoppel 
  T he circuit court also held on remand  that based on 
the jury trial verdict finding that Aloha Sports failed to prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the NCAA tortiously 
interfered with Aloha Sport’s sale of itself to Pro Sports , 
Aloha Sports was collaterally estopped from pursuing its UMOC 
claim.  Collateral estoppel, or issue preclusion, is a bar to 
the relitigation of a fact or  issue litigated in a prior suit 
when four requirements are met:  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
36 (1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is 
identical to the one presented in the action in question; 
(2) there is a final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue 
decided in the prior adjudication was essential to the 
final judgment; and (4) the party  against whom collateral 
estoppel is asserted was a party or in privity with a party 
to the prior  adjudication.  
Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai i 143, 149, 976 P.2d 904, 910 (1999).  
As an initial matter, Aloha Sports is correct in its contention 
that, because the ICA vacated the circuit court’s January 12, 
2012 final judgment, no final judgment in a prior case currently 
exists and the elements of collateral estoppel are not met
.  
Nevertheless, we must consider whether the jury’s determination 
as to Aloha Sports ’ claim for tortious interference with 
prospective business advantage resolved facts in this case  that 
would necessarily preclude recovery on Aloha Sports’ UMOC claim.  
  T he elements of a HRS § 480- 13(a) claim based on an 
unfair method of competition and a claim for intentional or 
tortious interference with prospective business advantage are 
not identical.  To establish an unfair method of competition 
claim, a plaintiff must prove: “(1) a violation of HRS Chapter 
480; (2) which causes an injury to the plaintiff's business or 
property; and (3) proof of the amount of damages. ”  Gurrobat v. 
HTH Corp. , 133 Hawai i 1, 21, 323 P.3d 792, 812 (2014).  Under  
the second element, a plaintiff must demonstrate that the 
defendant’s conduct negatively affects competition and that the  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 plaintiff’s injury stems from the defendant’s anti -competitive 
or unfair conduct.  Id. at 22-23, 323 P.3d at 8
13-14.  There is 
no intent element required  to establish an  unfair method of 
competition claim .  See Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen , 
139 Hawai i 394, 413, 391 P.3d 1, 20 (2017) (ci ting Short v. 
Demopolis, 103 Wash.2d 52, 691 P.2d 163, 172 (Wash. 1984) 
(Pearson, J., concurring)).  
 
 In contrast, the elements of intentional or tortious 
interference with prospective business advantage  require the 
plaintiff to prove all of the following:  
(1) the existence of a valid business relationship 
or a 
prospective advantage or expectancy sufficiently definite, 
specific, and capable of acceptance in the sense that there 
is a reasonable probability of it maturing into a future 
economic benefit to the plaintiff; (2) knowledge of the 
relationship, advantage, or expectancy by the defendant; 
(3) a purposeful intent  to interfere with the relationship, 
advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation between the 
act of interference and the impairment of the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; and (5) actual damages.   
Robert's Hawaii Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., Inc. , 
91 Hawai i 224, 258, 982 P.2d 853, 887 (1999) (citations and 
footnote omitted)  (emphasis added).  Notably, u nlike an unfair 
method of competition claim, tortious interference with 
prospective business advantage includes a purposeful  intent 
element.   
 
 Although Aloha Sports relies on many of the same 
underlying facts to support the UMOC claim as the tortious ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
38 interference with prospective business advantage claim, the 
jury’s verdict on the interference with prospective business 
advantage claim did not provide any specific determinations 
regarding the individual 
elements of that claim.31  Thus, it is 
unclear which issues and facts the jury determined to render its 
verdict.  For example, the jury could have determined that the 
NCAA was not liable
 for tortious interference with prospective 
business advantage based solely on a failure to meet the 
purposeful intent 
element-- an element not required in an UMOC 
claim.  Simply stated,  the jury’s determination that the NCAA 
was not liable for tortious interference with prospective 
business advantage did not  definitively resolve factual issues 
that would prevent Aloha Sports from satisfying the elements of 
its UMOC claim .  Accordingly, the circuit court erred  in holding 
that issue preclusion barred Aloha Sports from asserting its 
UMOC claim. 
                     
 31 The Special Verdict Form stated , “Did Plaintiff ASI prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that Defendant NCAA tortiously interfered with 
ASI’s prospective business advantage with Pro Sports & Entertainment?”  In 
the space marked “No” the jury indicated that all “12” jurors found that 
Aloha Sports had not proven tortious interference beyond a preponderance of 
the evidence.  Because the jury marked “No” on the first question, the jury 
was not required to and did not respond to the remaining questions, i.e., 
whether Aloha Sports had proven beyond a preponderance of the evidence that 
the NCAA’s actions were the cause of Aloha Sports harm, or the reasonable 
dollar amount of that harm.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39  CONCLUSION IV.
  Based on the foregoing, Aloha Sports raised genuine 
issues of material fact as to the first and second elements of 
an UMOC claim.  The third element, damages, has not been 
contested.  Therefore, the ICA erred in affirming the circuit 
court’s order and judg ment granting the NCAA summary judgment.  
Further, the circuit court erred in  holding that  Aloha Sports 
was estopped from asserting the UMOC claim based on waiver, 
judicial estoppel, and collateral estoppel.  We therefore vacate 
the ICA’s judgment on appea l, the circuit court ’s final 
judgment, and the Order Granting Summary Judgment,  and the case  
is remanded to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.32   
Amy T. Brantly 
Frederick W. Rohlfing, III 
for petitioner 
 
Gregory L. Curtner 
William C. McCorriston 
Jordon J. Kimura 
for respondent 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
                     
 32 Based on our disposition, the ICA’s holding affirming the 
Attorney’s Fee Order is also vacated because it flows from the ICA and 
circuit court’s holdings that the NCAA was the prevailing party on summary 
judgment.  See HRS § 607 -14 (2016); Blair v. Ing , 96  Hawaii 327, 331, 31 P.3d 
184, 188 (2001).    
