***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
BRONSON KANEAIAKALA,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant . 
_____________________________________________________________  
 
SCWC-16-0000647  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-16 -0000647; CR. NO. 15-1-0108) 
 
OCTOBER 1, 2019  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
 
I. Introduction  
 This appeal arises from an impermissibly suggestive field 
show-up identification.  Midday on Saturday, January 24, 2015, 
Mari Laraway (“Laraway”) was walking with her minor son  from
 
their apartment  building on Date Street to her car.  As she 
walked alongside the apartment building, she saw a man crouching Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000647
01-OCT-2019
08:04 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
2 (continued. . .)  
 beneath the window of 
a ground-floor apartment.  Once at her 
car, she looked up and saw the man entering the apartment 
through a window.  Laraway called 911 
to report the man’s 
activity.   
 Honolulu Police Department (“HPD”) officers later found 
Petitioner/Defendant- Apellant Bronson Kaneaiakala 
(“Kaneaiakala”) naked in the laundry room of the apartment 
building with items missing from the apartment, and they 
arrested him.  Two-and-a- half hours after she had seen a man 
enter the ground-floor apartment through a window, Laraway met 
the officers on the street outside the apartment building.  
Kaneaiakala was shirtless, handcuffed, and standing beside a 
police car, surrounded by police.  Laraway looked at Kaneaiakala 
and told the officers she was “almost positive” Kaneaiakala  was 
the man she saw at the window earlier.  After she had identified 
Kaneaiakala as the suspect, Laraway was asked to complete a 
suspect description form and she gave the officers a written 
statement.     
 The State of Hawai ʻi (“State”) charged Kaneaiakala with one 
count of Burglary in the First Degree in violation of Hawai ‘i
 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 708 -810(1)(c) (2014).   Before trial, 1
                     
1 HRS § 708- 810(1)(c) provides as follows:   
 
(1)  A person commits the offense of burglary in the first 
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
3 
 Kaneaiakala filed a motion to suppress Laraway’s show -up 
identification. 
 The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (“circuit court”)2  
conducted a hearing on the motion to suppress.  The State 
stipulated that the procedure employed by HPD was impermissibly 
suggestive.  The circuit court found Laraway’s identification 
nonetheless sufficiently reliable and denied the motion.  At 
jury trial, the State presented testimony from Laraway, one of 
the residents of the burglarized apartment, and two police 
officers.  The jury found Kaneaiakala guilty as charged.  
 On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) 
affirmed the conviction and, in a summary disposition order, 
held that the circuit court did not err in concluding that 
Laraway’s identification was suffici ently reliable for admission 
in evidence and consideration by the jury.  State v. 
Kaneaiakala, No. CAAP-16-0000647 at 2-5 (App. Nov. 7, 2017) 
(SDO).  On certiorari, Kaneaiakala argues Laraway’s 
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a 
crime against a person or against property rights, and:  
 
. . . . 
 
       (c)  The person recklessly disregards a risk that the building is 
  the dwelling of another, and the building is such a dwelling.  
 
2 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided over the hearing on 
Kaneaiakala’s motion to suppress and jury trial.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
4 
 identification should have been suppressed because it was 
unreliable and tainted by HPD’s show -
up procedure.  
 As Justice Brennan stated in 1967, “[t]he vagaries of 
eyewitness identification are well- known; the annals of criminal 
law are rife with instances of mistaken identification.”  United 
States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 228 (1967).  In the half-century 
since Wade, science on human memory has advanced even further, 
and it has become widely accepted that unreliable eyewitness 
identifications are the leading cause of wrongful convictions.    
 Recognizing this, in Stat e v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai ‘i 302, 
313-14, 277 P.3d 1027, 1038-39 (2012)
, we held that when the 
trustworthiness or reliability of eyewitness identification is 
central to a case, trial courts must give a specific jury 
instruction when requested by the defense to focus the jury’s 
attention on the reliability of the identification.  127 Hawaiʻi 
at 313-14, 277 P.3d at 1038-39.  We also proposed a model jury 
instruction to address reliability concerns with eyewitness 
identifications, including thirteen reliability factors that a 
judge should consider including in a jury instruction.  127 
Hawai‘i at 314, 277 P.3d at 1039.  
 By ruling that trial courts no longer had discretion to 
reject defense requests for a jury instruction regarding the 
trustworthiness of eyewitness identifications, we abrogated the 
holding in State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 552 P.2d 357 (1976), ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ̒I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
 that a trial court had discretion to decide whether to give such 
an instruction.   
While overruling Padilla on that point in Cabagbag, we did 
not address another holding of Padilla.  In Padilla , we also 
adopted a test set out by the United States Supreme Court in 
Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972), for trial courts to apply 
to determine whether an eyewitness identification procured 
through an impermissibly suggestive procedure should be 
admissible in evidence.  We held that when an eyewitness 
identification is procured through an impermissibly suggestive 
procedure, the trial court must evaluate five factors under the 
totality of the circumstances to determine whether the 
identification is nonetheless sufficiently reliable to be 
admitted in evidence.  
Padilla, 57 Haw. at 154, 552 P.2d at 360.  
The five factors are: (1) the opportunity of the witness to 
view the defendant at the time of the crime, (2) the witness's 
degree of attention
, (3) the accura cy of the witness's  prior 
description of the defendant,  (4) the level of certainty 
demonstrated by the witness at the identification, and (5) the 
length of time between the crime and the identification .  Id.   
 The thirteen factors we held in Cabagbag  that a judge 
should consider including in a jury instruction regarding 
reliability of eyewitness identifications include the five ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
6 
 factors delineated in Padilla  for a judge to consider in 
addressing admissibility. 
 After Cabagbag, in State v. Cabinatan, 132 Hawai ‘i 63, 76, 
319 P.3d 1071, 1084 (2014), we noted that although field show-up 
identifications can be admissible, they are 
inherently 
suggestive.  We cited to various United States Supreme Court 
opinions criticizing identifications of only one person 
presented as a possible perpetrator of a crime, including 
Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 302 (1967) abrogated on other 
grounds by  Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314 (1987), which had 
stated that “[t]he practice of showing suspects singly to 
persons for the purpose of identification, and not as part of a 
lineup, has been widely condemned.”  Cabinatan , 132 Hawaiʻi at 
83, 319 P.3d 1091.  We held that under the circumstances of that 
case, where the eyewitness’s testimony suggested her 
identification of the defendant in a show- up might have been 
influenced by suggestive procedures, even under the pre- Cabagbag 
discretionary standard, the trial court abused its discretion in 
denying a defense request for a jury instruction regarding the 
inherent suggestiveness of show -up identifications.  Cabinatan, 
132 Hawaiʻi at 77, 319 P.3d at 1085.  But because the issue 
before us was the need for a jury instruction and not 
admissibility, we did not address whether trial courts must also ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
7 
 consider additional factors when addressing the admissibility of 
show-up identifications. 
 
 A defendant is denied due process of law, however, when the 
procedure used to obtain an eyewitness identification admitted 
at trial is “unnecessarily suggestive and conducive to 
irreparable mistaken iden tification.”  State v. Masaniai, 63 
Haw. 354, 362, 628 P.2d 1018, 1024 (1981) (citations omitted).  
In this case, we therefore address whether, in determining 
whether an eyewitness identification procured through an 
impermissibly suggestive procedure is nonetheless sufficiently 
reliable under the totality of the circumstances to be admitted 
in evidence, a trial judge must also consider factors we have 
held the judge must consider including in a jury instruction 
regarding the reliability of the eyewitness identification.   
 In doing so, we set forth new rules that expressly overrule 
precedent upon which parties have regulated their conduct; 
therefore, our holdings will only apply prospectively to events 
occurring after publication of this decision, i.e., to 
admissibility determinations or jury instructions given after 
the date of this opinion.  See  State v. Auld, 136 Hawai ʻi 244, 
256, 361 P.3d 471, 483 (2015) (citations omitted) (“The 
‘paradigm case’  warranting a prospective-only application of a 
new rule arises ‘when a court expressly overrules a precedent 
upon which the contest would otherwise be decided differently ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
8 (continued. . .)  
 and by which the parties may previously 
have regulated their 
conduct.’”). 
 Factors to be applied in addressing eyewitness and show- up 
identifications should not differ based on whether it is a judge 
or jury considering them for purposes of admissibility or, if 
admitted into evidence, for purposes of determining reliability.  
As further discussed below, and to summarize, we therefore 
prospectively hold that trial courts must, at minimum, consider 
any relevant factors set out in the Hawaiʻi Pattern Jury 
Instructions--Criminal (“Hawai
i Standard Instructions” or 
“HAWJIC”) governing eyewitness  and show-up identification 
testimony,  as may be amended, as well as any other relevant 3̒
                     
3  The HAWJIC 3.19 (2014) “Eyewitness Testimony” instruction currently 
reads as follows:  
 
The burden of proof is on the prosecution with reference to 
every element of a crime charged, and this burden includes 
the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt the 
identity of the defendant as the person responsible for the 
crime charged.  
 
You must decide whether an eyewitness gave accurate 
testimony regarding identification.  
 
In evaluating identification testimony, you may consider 
the following factors:  
 
The opportunity of the witness to observe the person 
involved in the alleged criminal act;  
 
The stress, if any, to which the witness was subject at the 
time of the observation;  
 
The witness’s ability, following the observation, to 
provide a description of the person;  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
9 (continued. . .)  
                                                                   
(continued. . .) 
The extent to which the defendant fits or does not fit the 
description of the person previously given by the witness;  
 
The cross- racial or ethnic nature of the identification;  
 
The witness’s capacity to make an identification;  
 
Evidence relating to the witness ’s ability to identify 
other participants in the alleged criminal act;  
 
Whether the witness was able to identify the person in a 
photographic or physical lineup;  
 
The period of time between the alleged criminal act and the 
witness’s identification ;  
 
Whether the witness had prior contacts with the person;  
 
The extent to which the witness is either certain or 
uncertain of the identification and whether the witness’s 
assertions concerning certainty or uncertainty are well -
founded;  
 
Whether the witn ess’s identification is in fact the product 
of his/her own recollection; and  
 
Any other e vidence relating to the witness’ s ability to 
make an identification.  
 
The commentary provides that “[t]he court may wish to delete from the 
instruction those listed f actors that do not apply in a given case.”  HAWJIC 
3.19 cmt.   
 
 The HAWJIC 3.19A (2014) “Show -Up Identification” instruction currently 
reads as follows: 
 
In this case, in addition to other eyewitness 
identification testimony, you have received evidence that 
the defendant was identified by a witness at a so -called 
“show-up” conducted by the police.  While show -ups are 
permissible, they are inherently suggestive police 
procedures.  In determining the reliability and accuracy of 
an identification made at a police show -up, you must 
consider the totality of the circumstances involved in the 
show-up, which may include the following:  
 
[Whether the identification was the result of a suggestive 
procedure, including actions taken or words spoken by 
police or anyone else to the witness before, during, or 
after the identification process;]  
 
[Whether the police either indicated to the witness that a 
suspect was present in the procedure or failed to warn the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
10 
 factors that may be set out in binding precedent in addressing 
whether, under a totality of circumstances, an impermissibly 
suggestive eyewitness or show
-up identification is nonetheless 
sufficiently reliable to be admissible in evidence.  
 We also prospectively hold that in addressing the 
admissibility of a suggestive eyewitness or show- up 
identification, trial courts must also consider the effect of 
any suggestiveness on the reliability of the identification in 
determining whether it should be admitted into evidence. 
 
 Finally, we prospectively hold that
 when an eyewitness or 
show-up identification is central to a case or has been procured 
through a suggestive eyewitness or show
-up identification, the 
jury must also be instructed to consider the impact of any 
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
witness that the perpetrator may or may not be in the 
procedure;]  
 
[Whether the defendant was required to wear distinctive 
clothing that the perpetrator allegedly wore, or was 
handcuffed or otherwise appeared to be in police custody;]  
 
[Whether the witness was exposed to opinions, descriptions, 
or identifications made by other witnesses, or to 
photographs, news media, or to any other information that 
may have influenced the independence of the 
identification;]  
 
[Whether other participants in the show -up were similar in 
appearance to the defendant;]  
 
[Whether the witness's identification was made 
spontaneously and remained consistent thereafter;]  
 
[and any other circumstance relating to the witness’s 
ability to make an identification.]  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
11 
 suggestive procedure on the reliability of the eyewitness or 
show-up identification.4  
 In Kaneaiakala’s  case, however, the trial judge did not err 
in applying the Padilla factors that governed the admissibility 
determination at the time it was made.  As our holdings are 
prospective, we therefore affirm the ICA’s judgment on appeal 
affirming Kaneaiakala’s co nviction and the denial of his motion 
to suppress.   
II. Additional Factual and Procedural Background  
A. Circuit Court Proceedings 
 On January 26, 2015, the State charged Kaneaiakala via 
felony information with one count of Burglary in the First 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-810(1)(c).   
1. Pretrial Motion to Suppress Eyewitness Identification 
 On June 9, 2015, Kaneaiakala filed a motion to suppress 
Laraway’s identification and argued the identification was 
obtained through an impermissibly suggestive a nd unreliable 
show-up.  Kaneaiakala maintained  that as a result of the process 
used by the officers to conduct the field show-up, there was an 
“inordinately high” likelihood that Laraway incorrectly 
                     
4  This language, which already appears in HAWJIC 3.19A governing show -up 
identifications, could also be included in HAWJIC 3.19 governing eyewitness 
identifications: 
 
[Whether the identification was the result of a suggestive 
procedure, including actions taken or words spoken by 
police or anyone else to the witness before, during, or 
after the identification process;]  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
12 
 identified him as the man she saw at the window.   Kaneaiakala 
also asserted Laraway’s identification was unreliable because 
Laraway (1) viewed the man at the window briefly in passing, and 
(2) she later “admitted she had bad eye sight and was not 
wearing her glasses” when she witnessed the man at the wind ow.   
 The State responded that even if the show- up was 
impermissibly suggestive, Laraway’s identification was still 
admissible as reliable because: (1) Laraway saw the man at the 
window in broad daylight; (2) her view was not obstructed; (3) 
she “was able to provide at least a partial description of [the 
suspect] to 911” that was consistent with how Kaneaiakala looked 
when the police arrested him; (4) the show- up took place just a 
few hours after Laraway saw the man at the window; and (5) 
Laraway was “almost positive” that Kaneaiakala was the man she 
saw at the window based on his body shape, scruffy face, and 
short, curly hair.   
 The circuit court held a two- day hearing on the motion to 
suppress on September 1, 2015 and September 8, 2015.  Two 
witnesses testified at the hearing: Laraway and Officer Kanoa 
Hose (“Officer Hose”).  The following relevant testimony was 
presented at the hearing.      
a. Laraway’s Testimony    
Through a Japanese interpreter, Laraway testified as 
follows.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
13 
 Laraway lived in the 2904 Date Street Apartments on January 
24, 2015.  At around 12:30 p.m. that day, she left her apartment 
to walk to her car, which was parked on Date Street across from 
the apartment building.  As she and her son walked on the 
sidewalk alongside the apartment 
building before crossing Date 
Street, Laraway saw a man crouched beneath the window of a 
corner, ground-floor unit of the apartment building.  Laraway 
was about four meters away from the man when she also noticed 
that the window’s screen was rolled up.   
 Laraway could only see the side of the man’s face as she 
walked by, but she observed t he man had short, curly hair and a 
“scruffy face.”  She also noted he was “not black, but he seemed
to be suntanned, Caucasian with light brown . . . skin.”  She 
did not recognize him.  She took note of the man because “[i]t 
was quite unusual” for someone to be  
crouched there.   The ma n 
was wearing a hat covering a portion of his face, but at the 
hearing she could not remember whether the hat cast a shadow 
over his face.    
 When Laraway got into her car, which was parked facing 
towards the apartment, she looked up and saw the man’s upper 
body was through the window and into  the apartment.  She 
immediately called 911.5   
                     
5 The recording of Laraway’s 911 call was not offered as evidence at the 
motion to suppress hearing.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
14 
  On the day of the incident, Laraway spoke and wrote in 
English when interacting with HPD.  Laraway had given the 
following description of the man to the 911 dispatcher: “a 
skinny black guy,” who was also “muscular” and “stout,” and who 
was wearing a white or light blue t- shirt.   
 At the hearing, Laraway thought the shirt the man was 
wearing was long -sleeved.   She also clarified that she did not 
describe the man’s hair to the 911 dispatcher or tell the 911 
dispatcher that the man’s face was “scratchy or unshaved.”  
 After calling 911, Laraway drove to her son’ s soccer game.  
While at the park, at around 2:00 p.m., Laraway received a call 
from an officer, but did not further describe the man she saw at 
the window at that time.    
 Laraway returned home at around 3:00 p.m. and saw four 
police cars outside the apartment building.  The police told 
Laraway they had “captured the guy in the laundromat .”  She 
thought that meant they had  caught the man  she had seen earlier 
at the window.  Laraway agreed to participate in a field show- up 
outside the apartment building sometime between 3:00 p.m. and 
4:00 p.m.  The officers did not provide her with any forms or 
instructions before conducting the show- up.  
 The officers asked Laraway to look at Kaneaiakala, who was 
standing on the sidewalk, shirtless, handcuffed, and surrounded 
by police officers.  It wa s a “clear day” and she stood ten to ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
15 
 fifteen feet away from him.  On June 24, 2015, Laraway told the 
police she was “[p]retty sure” Kaneaiakala was the same man she 
had seen earlier.  S he “got the same impression”  from 
Kaneaiakala as she did from the man at the window, because of 
the “structure and the face and the hair color . . . the image 
itself, and also [the]  complexion of his skin. ”  
 Laraway admitted she did not see anything distinct about 
the eyes or nose of the man at the window, and if shown someone 
with similar body shape and complexion, it might have been hard 
for her to identify the correct person.  She further testified, 
however, that she was sure that Kaneaiakala was the man she saw 
at the window.   
 After she identified Kaneaiakala, Laraway completed a 
written statement on which she wrote, “I almost positive the guy 
was him.”  After identifying Kaneaiakala, she also filled out  a 
suspect description form, checking various boxes describing the 
suspect as a Caucasian male, 5’6” to 5’8” feet tall with a 
medium build, dark brown hair, brown facial hair, and wearing a 
long-sleeved white polo shirt and long blue pants.  She wrote in 
the word “scruffy” to describe the man at the window ’s facial 
hair.  
 
 Laraway explained that on June 24, 2015, she had checked 
the box indicating the man at the window was wearing pants, but 
she now recalled the man at the window was wearing shorts.  She ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
16 
 also explained she checked the box for long- sleeved shirt, but 
testified that the man  might have been wearing a short-sleeved 
shirt.  She acknowledged she checked the box indicating the man 
at the window
’s height based on later seein g Kaneaiakala at the 
show-up.   
 On January 24, 2015, Laraway had spoken English with the 
officers and completed all forms in English.  
At some point that 
day, she told the police that she has “bad eyesight” and that 
she was not wearing her glasses when she saw the man at the 
window.  Laraway testified she was born and raised in Japan and 
grew up interacting mostly with Japanese people.  
At her 
workplace, she predominately interacts with ethnically Japanese 
people.  During her past decade in Hawai ʻi, however, she has seen 
and interacted with diverse people, and she is married to a 
Caucasian man.   
 At the hear ing, Laraway also identified Kaneaiakala, who 
was present in the courtroom, as the man she had seen  at the 
window.   
b. Officer Hose’s Testimony  
 Officer Hose testified that on January 24, 2015, at around 
12:38 p.m., he responded to a “suspicio us circumsta nces type 
case” at the apartment building.  Upon his arrival, he noticed 
that a window screen of a ground-floor, corner apartment had 
been cut.  He contact
ed the owner of the apartment, who arrived ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
17 
 around 1:00 p.m.  The owner looked in the apartment and 
identified missing items.   
 Officer Hose left the apartment, but was called back thirty 
minutes later to investigate a situation involving “a nude male 
in the laundry room.”  When he returned, Officer Abe Kamanao 
(“Officer Kamanao”) was in the laundry room with the man , whom 
Officer Hose identified in court  as Kaneaiakala.  The officers 
found a long-sleeved, light- blue collared shirt and a pair of 
black shorts near Kaneaiakala and instructed Kaneaiakala to put 
on the shorts.  O fficer Hose observed that several items the 
apartment owner reported missing were in the laundry room, 
including the watch Kaneaiakala was wearing.   
 Officer Hose then called Laraway, who said she was 
returning to the apartment building soon.  When she returned, he 
asked her if she would be able to identify the man she saw at 
the window and whether she would “be willing to participate in a 
field show-up .”   
  To conduct the show-up, Officer Hose had Kaneaiakala stand 
next to a parked police car on the street outside the apartment 
building.  He had 
Laraway stand “no more than about 40 feet” 
away from Kaneaiakala, from where she had a clear
, unobstructed 
view of Kaneaiakala.  Laraway  calmly and quickly identified  
Kaneaiakala as the man she saw at the window.   
 Officer Hose  testified  that Laraway was never given any ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
18 
 instructions and was never told that the person  she viewed may 
or may not be a suspect.  He  denied telling Laraway that 
Kaneaiakala was the man she had seen earlier. He admitted that 
Laraway did not record her description of the man at the window 
until after the show- up.   
 During Officer Hose’s cross-examination, the State 
stipulated that the show-up was impermissibly suggestive.   
c. The Circuit Court’s Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law, and Order Denying Motion to Suppress 
 On October 27, 2015, the circuit court entered findings of 
fact and conclusions of law denying Kaneaiakala’s motion to 
suppress.  The court ’s findings of fact were based largely on 
Laraway’s testimony of the events th at occurred on January 24, 
2015.  The findings of fact included, among other things, that 
Laraway (1) participated in a field show- up, (2) recognized 
Kaneaiakala based on his build, body shape, complexion, and 
hair, and (3) told the officers she was “almost positive” that 
Kaneaiakala was the man she saw at the window.   
 Based on those findings, the circuit c
ourt concluded that: 
(1) although the show-up procedure was impermissibly suggestive, 
(2) Laraway’s identification of Kaneaiakala was nonetheless 
admissible because the totality of the circumstances, including 
the five Biggers factors, indicated the identification was 
reliable.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
19 
  The case then proceeded to jury trial.   
2. Jury Trial 
 Kaneaiakala’s jury trial was held from April 18, 2016 to 
April 20, 2016.  The State called four witnesses:  Laraway, 
Officer Hose, Kip Praissman (“Praissman”), and Officer Kamanao.  
Kaneaiakala did not present any witnesses.  Laraway’s testimony 
was substantially similar to her testimony at the hearing on the 
motion to suppress.  At trial, she added that she lived with her 
husband and son at the 2904 Date Street apartment building on 
January 24, 2015, and that she had left their apartment that day 
with her twelve-year-old son to go to her son’s soccer game at 
Kapiolani Park.  
Officer Hose’s testimony was substantially 
similar to his testimony at the hearing on the motion to 
suppress.  
 Praissman, a resident of the ground
-floor apartment that 
was broken into, testified in pertinent part as follows.  He had 
locked the apartment when he left it the morning of January 24, 
2015.  He returned around 1:00 p.m. after receiving a call from 
HPD that his apartment had been burglarized and met with HPD 
officers to identify what items were missing from the apartment 
and to provide a statement.   
 A short time after the officers left, Praissman discovered 
a naked man standing in the laundry room of the apartment 
building and wearing Praissman’s watch.  Praissman  immediately ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
20 
 called the police.  Praissman later identified other items the 
officers found in the laundry room with the man as items missing 
from his apartment.  At trial,  Praissman identified the man he 
saw in the laundry room as Kaneaiakala.  
 
Officer Kamanao testified that on January 24, 2015, he had 
responded to a call regarding an attempted burglary at the 
apartment with Officer Hose and returned that same day in 
response to a call regarding a naked man in the building’s 
laundry room.  Kamanao testified that, along with clothing and 
some of Praissman’s missing items, the officers also found a 
kitchen mitt, pair of scissors, pair of pliers, knife, dental 
floss, and a screwdriver on the washing machine near 
Kaneaiakala.  At trial, Officer Kamanao identified Kaneaiakala 
as the man he saw in the laundry room.   
 The recording of Laraway’s phone call to 911 on the day of 
the incident was also introduced and played for the jury.  
 
 The jury found Kaneaiakala guilty as charged of one count 
of Burglary in the First Degree in violation of HRS § 708-
810(1)(c).   On September 20, 2016, the circu it court  entered a 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentenc e (“circuit court judgment”) 
sentencing Kaneaiakala to a ten- year term of imprisonment with a 
mandatory minimum sentence of three years and four months as a 
repeat offender.  Kaneaiakala timely appealed  from the circuit 
court judgment to the ICA.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
21 
 B. ICA Proceedings 
 On appeal to the ICA, Kaneaiakala argued the circuit court 
erred by denying his motion to suppress because the field show-
up was impermissibly suggestive and Laraway’s identification of 
Kaneaiakala was unreliable.  Kaneaiakala also argued there was 
insufficient evidence for the State to convict him of first 
degree burglary because the State did not present substantial 
evidence that Kaneaiakala burglarized the apartment.   
 In response, the State conceded the  show-up procedure was 
impermissibly suggestive.  The State argued, as it did in 
opposition to the motion to suppress, that Laraway’s 
identification was nevertheless admissible because it was 
reliable based on the totality of the circumstances.  The State 
maintained that based on the totality of the ci
rcumstances test 
set forth in Biggers and Padilla , the circuit court correctly 
denied Kaneaiakala’s  motion to suppress.   
 On November 7, 2017, the ICA entered an SDO affirming the 
circuit court’s denial of the motion to suppress and the circuit 
court judgment.  Kaneaiakala, SDO at 2.   Although the ICA 
accepted the State’s stipula tion that the field show -up was 
impermissibly suggestive, the ICA determined that Laraway’s 
identification was sufficiently reliable and worthy of 
presentation to the jury based on  the totality of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
22 
 circumstances.6   Kaneaiakala , SDO at 3- 5.  On November 24, 2017, 
the ICA entered a Judgment on Appeal consistent with the SDO 
(“judgment on appeal”).   
C. Application for Certiorari 
 Kaneaiakala  timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari from the ICA’s judgment on appeal and SDO.  
Kaneaiakala contends the ICA erred in upholding the circuit 
court’s rulings that Laraway’s identification of Kaneaia kala was 
sufficiently reliable for admissibility under Padilla .  
III. Standards of Review   
 With respect to whether an eyewitness identification should 
be suppressed, we have held that “questions of suggestiveness 
and reliability are questions of law that are freely reviewable 
on appeal.”  State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai ‘i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 80, 
88 (1995), 
abrogated on other grounds by  Cabagbag, 127 Hawai‘i at 
315, 277 P.3d at 1040.  However, “answering these questions 
involves determinations of fact by the [trial] court.”  78 
Hawaiʻi at 392, 894 P.2d at 89.  “[F]actual determinations made 
by the trial court deciding pretrial  motions in a criminal case 
[are] governed by the clearly erroneous standard,” and 
“conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong 
                     
6 The ICA also examined the State’s evidence and testimony adduced at 
trial and ultimately held there was substantial evidence identifying 
Kaneaiakala and thus sufficient evidence to convict hi m as charged.  See 
Kaneaiakala, SDO at 5- 8.   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
23 
 standard.”  State v. 
Edwards, 96 Hawai ‘i 224, 231, 30 P.3d 238,  
245 (2001) (quoting State v. Eleneki, 92 Hawai ‘i 562, 564, 993 
P.2d 1191, 1193 (2000)). 
  “A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made.”  Okumura, 78  Hawaiʻi at 
392, 894 P.2d at 89 (citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted).  When applying the “clearly erroneous” test, it must 
be remembered that: 
[i]t is for the trial judge as fact -finder to assess the 
credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of 
fact; the judge m ay accept or reject any witness’ s 
testimony in whole or in part.  As the trier of fact, the 
judge may draw all reasonable and legitimate inferences and 
deductions from the evidence, and the findings of the trial 
court will not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous.  An 
appellate court wil l not pass upon the trial judge’ s 
decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of 
the trial judge.   
 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai ʻi 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) 
(citations omitted).
  
IV. Discussion  
A. As State v. Padilla Controlled, the Circuit Court’s D enial 
of the Motion to S uppress was Properly A ffirmed by the ICA 
 
 A defendant is denied due process of law when the procedure 
used to obtain an eyewitness identification admitted at trial is 
“unnecessarily suggestive and co nducive to irreparable mistaken ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
24 
 identification.”  Masaniai, 63 Haw. at 362, 628 P.2d at 1024 
(citations omitted).  We have held, however, that an eyewitness 
identification is not inadmissible merely because the 
identification procedure was impermissibly suggestive.  State v. 
Malani, 59 Haw. 167, 170, 578 P.2d 236, 238 (1978) (citing 
Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98, 109-114 (1977)) 
(“Impermissible suggestiveness alone does not require the 
exclusion of identification evidence.”) .  Rather, whether an 
eyewitness identification obtained through an impermissibly 
suggestive procedure is admissible depends upon the reliability 
of the identification.  Cabagbag, 127 Hawai ‘i at 309, 277 P.3d at 
1034 (citing Padilla, 57 Haw. at 153-55, 552 P.2d at 360-61).   
 Kaneaiak ala argues the  ICA erred in upholding the circuit 
court’s ruling that La raway’s identification was sufficiently 
reliable under Padilla and thus admissible, because the 
impermissibly suggestive show -up produced an unreliable 
identification and created a substantial likelihood of 
misidentification, requiring suppression of the identification.  
We hold that pursuant to the Padilla rule then in effect, the 
circuit court did not clearly err in concluding that Laraway’s 
identification was sufficiently reliable and thus admissible.  
Therefore, the ICA did not err with regard to the admission of 
Laraway’s identification .   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
25 
  In this case, t
he circuit court accepted t he State’s 
stipulation that the show- up identification of Kaneaiakala was 
impermissibly suggestive.  See Cabinatan, 132 Hawai ʻi at 76, 319 
P.3d at 1084 (“While show -ups are permissible, they are 
inherently suggestive.”)  (citations omitted).   The circuit court 
then applied the five Biggers factors we adopted in Padilla to 
determine whether the show- up identification at issue was 
nevertheless sufficiently reliable to be admissible in evidence.  
Padilla held that even if an eyewitness identification is 
procured through an impermissibly suggestive procedure, the 
trial court must nonetheless determine whether the 
identification is sufficiently reliable under the totality of 
the circumstances to be admissible in evidence.  See Padilla, 57 
Haw. at 154, 552 P.2d at 360.  Under Padilla , the circuit court 
was required to conduct a totality of the circumstances analysis 
of Laraway’s identification, paying particular attention to (1) 
Laraway’s opportunity to view the suspect at the time of the 
crime, (2)  her degree of attention, (3) the accuracy of her 
prior description of the suspe ct, (4) the level of certainty she 
demonstrated at the show-up, and (5) the length of time between 
the crime and the show-up.   See Padilla, 57 Haw. at 154, 552 
P.2d at 360 (citing Biggers, 409 U.S. at 199- 200).   
 With respect to the five factors, the circuit court found: 
(1) Laraway “got a good look” at the suspect on the day of the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
26 (continued. . .)  
 incident; 
(2) she observed the suspect’s build, complexion, 
hairstyle, and clothing; (3) she did not recognize the suspect 
and felt something was wrong; (4) she looked back at the 
apartment while inside her car and saw that the suspect’s upper 
body had entered the apartment window, prompting her to call 
911; (5) Laraway had been “almost positive” at the field show -up 
that Kaneaiakala was the same man she saw beneath the window; 
and (6) at the motion to suppress hearing, Laraway “was sure 
that [Kaneaiakala] was the person she saw earlier,” even if “she 
might have a hard time picking between two people with similar 
body shape and complexion without seeing their face[s].”  The 
court also found that the show-up was conducted within three 
hours of Laraway’s initial observation of the suspect.  The 
court concluded that within the totality of the circumstances, 
including consideration of the five reliability factors, 
Laraway’s identifica tion was worthy of presentation to the jury.   
 Upon review of the testimony adduced at the motion to 
suppress hearing, the circuit court did not clearly err.  The 
ICA, therefore, did not err in upholding the circuit court’s 
denial of Kaneaiakala’s  motion to suppress based on the Padilla 
standards in effect at the time of the circuit court’s ruling.    7
                     
7 Kaneaiakala also argues that because Laraway’s identification should 
not have been admitted, the State did not present substantial evidence of his 
identity, and therefore the ICA erred by holding there was sufficient 
evidence at trial for his conviction.  Our affirmance of the ICA’s holding ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ̒I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 B. Prospectively, Trial Courts Must Consider the Same Factors 
as Jurors in Evaluating the Reliability of Challenged 
Eyewitness Identifications for Admissibility Purposes   
1. The Padilla Factors are Insufficient 
 As discussed, under our current framework, whe n a defendant 
challenges the admissibility of an eyewitness identification 
based on an impermissibly suggestive procedure, courts are 
required to determine within the totality of the circumstances 
whether the identification is nonetheless “sufficiently rel iable 
so that it is worthy for presentation to and consideration by 
the jury.”  See State v.Walton, 133 Hawai ‘i  66, 87-88, 324 P.3d 
876, 898 (2014) (citations omitted).  The identification must be 
suppressed only if the impermissibly suggestive procedure u
sed 
created a very substantial likelihood of misidentification.  133 
Hawai‘i at 87, 324 P.3d at 897 (citations omitted). 
 In this case, the circuit court applied the five- factor 
Biggers test we adopted in Padilla to determine whether a show-
up identification obtained from impermissibly suggestive 
procedure is nonetheless reliable under the totality of the 
circumstances and thus admissible.  57 Haw. at 154, 552 P.2d at 
360.  Since Padilla, we have not modified the  
five-factor test for admissibility of impermissibly suggestive 
eyewitness identifications.  
See, e.g., Cabagbag , 127 Hawai ʻi at 
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
that the circuit court did not err in admitting Laraway’s identification is 
dispositive on that issue.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
28 
 309, 277 P.3d at 1034 (applying the Padilla/ Biggers factors in 
2012).  
 It has become widely accepted since 1976, however, that 
misidentifications are one of the leading causes of wrongful 
convictions.  127 Hawai ʻi at 315,  277 P.3d at 1040.  A robust 
body of scholarship and empirical research has emerged calling 
into doubt whether the Biggers  factors we adopted in Padilla are 
sufficient indicators of reliability and admissibility.   
 In Cabagbag, we held that when identification evidence is a 
central issue in a case, a court must, at the defendant’s 
request, give a specific jury instruction about factors 
affecting the reliability of eyewitness identification.  127 
Hawai‘i at 304, 313 –15, 277 P.3d at 1029, 1038 –
40.  To support 
the need for the special jury instructions, we cited numerous 
studies evincing the connection between unreliable eyewitness 
identifications and wrongful convictions.  127 Hawai ʻi at 310- 14, 
277 P.3d at 1035-39.  We explained: 
Many studies now confirm that false identifications are  
more common than was previously believed.  For example, 
Professor Brandon L. Garrett concluded in a study involving 
250 exonerated defendants that “[e]yewitnesses 
misidentified 76% of the exonerees (190 of 250 cases).” 
Brandon L. Garrett,  Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal 
Prosecutions Go Wrong , 48 (2011).  Professor Garrett’ s 
original study of 200 such cases in 2008 concluded that  
eyewitness identification testimony was the leading 
contributing factor to wrongful convictions and was four 
times more likely to contribute to a wrongful conviction 
than a false confession.  Brandon L. Garrett,  Judging 
Innocence,  108 Colum. L. Rev. 55, 76 (2008).  Other studies 
have reached similar results.  See, e.g. , Edward Connors,  
et. al., Convicted by Juries, Exonerated by Science: Case 
Studies in the Use of DNA Evidence to Establish Innocence ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
29 
 after Trial , 15, 96 (1996), available at  https://www.ncjrs. 
gov/pdffiles/dnaevid.pdf (reviewing 28 sexual assault cases 
in which defendants were later exonerated and concluding 
that all cases, except those involving homicide, “involved  
victim eyewitness identification both prior to and at 
trial,” and that in those cases “eyewitness testimony was  
the most compelling evidence”); Gary L. Wells, et. al., 
Recommendations for Properly Conducted Lineup 
Identification Tasks, in Adult Eyewitness Testimony:  
current Trends and Developments  223–24 (1994) (studying 
over 1,000 wrongful convictions and concluding that recall 
errors by witnesses were the leading cause of such  
convictions).  
 
127 Hawai ʻi at 310 , 277 P.3d at 1035 (some formatting altered).   
 In Cabagbag , we recognized that studies had identified 
factors such as “passage of time, witness stress, duration of 
exposure, distance, ‘weapon focus . . . ’, and cross -race bias”8 
as affecting the reliability of an eyewitness identification.   
127 Hawai ʻi at 310-
11, 277 P.3d at 1035- 36.  We also noted that, 
“[e]mpirical research has also undermined the common sense 
notion that the confidence of the witness is a valid indicator  
of the accuracy of the identification.”  127 Hawai ‘i at 311, 277 
P.3d at 1036 .   
 Accordingly, we set out thirteen factors that a judge 
should consider including in a jury instruction on how to assess 
the reliability of an eyewitness identification which Hawaii’s 
                     
8  Other jurisdictions have also recognized that cross -race identification 
raises significant reliability issues.   See, e.g. , Young v. State, 374 P.3d  
395, 424 (Alaska 2016); State v. Henderson, 27 A.3d 872, 907 (N.J. 2011).  
See also Anthony G. Greenwald & Linda  Hamilton  Krieger, Implicit Bias: 
Scientific Foundations, 94 C ALIF. L. REV. 945, 946 (2006)  (“[T]he science  
of implicit cognition suggests that actors do not always have conscious,  
intentional control over the processes of social perception, impression  
formation, and judgment that motivate their actions.”) . 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
30 
 Standard Committee on Pattern Jury Instructions (“Jury 
Instructions Committee”) has adopted in Hawai ʻi
 Standard 
Instruction 3.19.  HAWJIC 3.19  reads as follows:   
The burden of proof is on the prosecution with reference to 
every element of a crime charged, and this burden includes 
the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt the 
identity of the defendant as the person responsible for the 
crime charged.  
 
You must decide whether an eyewitness gave accurate 
testimony regarding identification.  
 
In evaluating identification testimony, you may consider 
the following factors:  
 
The opportunity of the witness to observe the person 
involved in the alleged criminal act;  
 
The stress, if any, to which the witness was subject at the 
time of the observation;  
 
The witness’s ability, following the observation, to 
provide a description of the person;  
 
The extent to which the defendant fits or does not fit the 
description of the person previously given by the witness;  
 
The cross- racial or ethnic nature of the identification;  
 
The witness’s capacity to make an identification;  
 
Evidence relating to the 
witness’s ability to identify 
other participants in the alleged criminal act;  
 
Whether the witness was able to identify the person in a 
photographic or physical lineup;  
 
The period of time between the alleged criminal act and the 
witness’s identification ;  
 
Whether the witness had prior contacts with the person;  
 
The extent to which the witness is either certain or 
uncertain of the identification and whether the witness’s 
assertions concerning certainty or uncertainty are well -
founded;  
 
Whether the witn ess’s identification is in fact the product 
of his/her own recollection; and  
 
Any other e vidence relating to the witness’ s ability to 
make an identification.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
31 
  
HAWJIC 3.19 Eyewitness Testimony (added underscoring indicating 
substantive addition to the instruction approved in 
Cabagbag).9   
 The existing Padilla  factors, in contrast, only require 
that a judge consider the following five factors, some of which 
are subsumed in different terminology within HAWJIC 3.19:  (1) 
the opportunity of the witness to view the defendant at the time 
of the crime, (2)  the witness's degree of attention, (3) the 
accuracy of the witness's prior description of the 
defendant, 
(4) the level of certainty demonstrated by the witness at the 
identification, and (5) the length of time between the crime and 
the identification .  
 In Cabagbag, by ruling that trial courts no longer have 
discretion to reject a defense request for a jury instruction 
regarding the reliability of an eyewitness identification, we 
abrogated our holding in Padilla that the decision on whether or 
not to give such a jury instruction was discretionary with the 
trial court.  While overruling Padilla on this point, however, 
as admissibility was not at issue, we did not address whether a 
trial judge should also have to consider the thirteen Cabagbag 
factors, rather than the five Padilla factors, to determine 
                     
9  In addition to the underscored text, HAWJIC 3.19 differs from the 
instruction proposed in Cabagbag by its use of “person involved in the 
alleged criminal act” in place of where Cabagbag  used “perpetrator.”  Compare 
HAWJIC 3.19 with Cabagbag, 127 Hawai‘ i at 314, 277 P.3d at 1039 .   
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
32 (continued. . .)  
 whether an impermissibly suggestive eyewitness identification 
was nonetheless sufficiently reliable under the totality of 
circumstances to be admis
sible in evidence.   
 After Cabagbag, in Cabinatan, we noted that although field 
show-up identifications can be admissible, they are inherently 
suggestive.  Cabinatan, 132 Hawai ʻi10 at 76, 319 P.3d at 1084.   We 
                     
10  We noted: 
 
The police did not have Kincaid identify  Cabinatan in 
either a line -up or photographic array.  Thus, 
identification of  Cabinatan was made at an inherently 
suggestive field showup where  Cabinatan  was in 
handcuffs.   See, e.g., United States v. Newman , 144 F.3d 
531, 535 (7th Cir. 1998)  (“We have noted many  times that a 
showup identification, in which witnesses confront only one 
suspect, is inherently suggestive.”) (citing  United States 
ex rel. Kirby v. Sturges , 510 F.2d 397, 403 (7th Cir. 
1975)
 (Stevens, J.) (“Without question, almost any one -to-
one confrontation between a victim of crime and a person 
whom the police present to him as a suspect must convey the 
message that the police have reason to believe him
 
guilty.”)).  The United States Supreme Court has noted that 
“the influence of improper suggestion upon identifying
 
witnesses probably accounts for more miscarriages of 
justice than any other s ingle factor.”   United States v.
 
Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 229, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149  
(1967) (internal quotation marks omitted).  Such suggestive
 
circumstances have a “corrupting effect” on 
reliability.  
 Manson v. Brathwaite , 432 U.S. 98, 114, 97 
S.Ct. 2243, 53 L.Ed.2d 140 (1977) ; see
 also Stovall v. 
Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 302, 87 S.Ct. 1967, 18 L.Ed.2d 1199  
(1967) (“The practice of showing suspects singly to persons 
for the purpose of identification, and not as part of a 
lineup, has been widely condemned.”);  State v. DeCenso , 5 
Haw.App. 127, 131, 681 P.2d 573, 578 (1984) .
  As explained 
by the dissent in  Perry [v. New Hampshire
, 565 U.S. 228, 
251 (2012) ], an initial identification derived through 
suggestive circumstances often is difficult to discredit as 
part of the adversary process:  
 
Eyewitness evidence derived from suggestive 
circumstances .  . . is uniquely resistant to 
the ordinary tests of the adversary process.  
An eyewitness who has made an identification 
often become convinced of its accuracy.  . . . 
At trial, an eyewitness' artificially inflated ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
33 
 held that under the circumstances of that case, where the 
eyewitness’s testimony indicated her show -up identification of 
the defendant might have been influenced by suggestive 
procedures, even though the giving of an instruction was 
discretionary pre-Cabagbag, the trial court abused its 
discretion in denying a defense request for a jury instruction 
regarding the inherent suggestiveness of show- up 
identifications.  Cabinatan , 132 Hawai ʻi at 77, 319 P.3d at 1085. 
Again, although we ruled that jurors must be instructed on 
issues regarding the suggestiveness of show- up identifications, 
as admissibility was not at issue, we did not address whether a 
judge would also be required to consider suggestiveness factors 
affecting reliability in evaluating admissibility.   
 As a result of our holding in Cabinatan, the Jury 
Instructions Committee also promulgated Hawai ʻi Standard 
Instruction 3.19A regarding show-up identifications, which reads 
as follows: 
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
confidence in an identification's accuracy 
complicates the jury's task of assessing 
witness credibility and reliability.  . . . The 
end result of suggestion .  . . is to fortify 
testimony bearing directly on guilt that juries 
find extremely convincing and are hesitant to 
discredit.  
 
Perry, 132 S.Ct. at 732  (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).  
 
Cabinatan, 132 Hawaiʻ i at 82-83, 319 P.3d at 1090 -91.  
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
34 
 In this case, in addition to other eyewitness 
identification testimony, you have received evidence that 
the defendant was identified by a witness at a so -called 
“show-up” conducted by the police.  While show -ups are 
permissible, they are inherently suggest
ive police 
procedures.  In determining the reliability and accuracy of 
an identification made at a police show -up, you must 
consider the totality of the circumstances involved in the 
show-up, which may include the following:  
 
[Whether the identification was the result of a suggestive 
procedure, including actions taken or words spoken by 
police or anyone else to the witness before, during, or 
after the identification process;]  
 
[Whether the police either indicated to the witness that a 
suspect was present in the procedure or failed to warn the 
witness that the perpetrator11 may or may not be in the 
procedure;]  
 
[Whether the defendant was required to wear distinctive 
clothing that the perpetrator allegedly wore, or was 
handcuffed or otherwise appeared to be 
in police custody;]  
 
[Whether the witness was exposed to opinions, descriptions, 
or identifications made by other witnesses, or to 
photographs, news media, or to any other information that 
may have influenced the independence of the 
identification;]  
 
[Whether other participants in the show -up were similar in 
appearance to the defendant;]  
 
[Whether the witness's identification was made 
spontaneously and remained consistent thereafter;]  
 
[and any other circumstance relating to the witness’s 
ability to make an identification.]  
   
HAWJIC 3.19A Show-Up Identification.   
 This instruction appropriately points out additional 
factors that a judge should consider including in a jury 
instruction regarding the reliability of show- up 
identifications.  Yet, trial courts are currently not required 
                     
11  We suggest that, similar to HAWJIC 3.19, “perpetrator” be changed to 
“person involved in the alleged criminal act” whenever it appears in this 
instruction.  See supra text accompanying note 9.    
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
35 
 to consider any of these factors that may be relevant in 
evaluating reliability for admissibility
 purposes.  
2. Admissibility C riteria in Other States 
 Several states that also adopted the five- factor Biggers 
test, as we did in Padilla, have since modified their frameworks 
to require trial judges to consider additional factors affecting 
reliability contained in jury instructions when they evaluate 
the reliability of eyewitness identifications for admissibility 
purposes. 
 The Utah Supreme Court, for example, adopted the Biggers 
test in 1980.  See State v. McCumber, 622 P.2d 353, 357 (Utah 
1980) (abrogation recognized in State v. Ramirez
, 817 P.2d 774, 
779-81 (Utah 1991)).  Initially, in 1986, as we did in Cabagbag , 
the Utah court recognized weaknesses with the Biggers test in 
light of scientific studies on human memory and modified the 
considerations to be included in its jury instructions, which 
previously only included the five Biggers factors.  See State v. 
Long, 721 P.2d 483, 490 (Utah 1986).  The Utah court retained 
only two of the Biggers factors and explicitly rejected the 
Biggers “level of certainty” factor based on studies indicating 
that suggestive police procedures may influence a witness’s 
confidence.  See Long, 721 P.2d at 490- 93.  The Utah court also 
required consideration of whether an identification was the 
product of suggestion.  See 721 P.2d at 493.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
36 
  
Then, with respect to the admissibility of suggestive 
eyewitness identifications, the Utah Supreme Court ruled in 1991 
that the reliability factors to be included in jury instructions 
also applied to the threshold question of the admissibility of 
eyewitness identifications.12  See Ramirez, 817 P.2d at 778- 79.   
 Similarly, the New Jersey Supreme Court had adopted Bi ggers 
and Manson in 1982.  State v. Carter, 449 A.2d 1280, 1303-04 
(N.J. 1982).  Then in 2011, in the leading case State v. 
Henderson,  after extensive research on memory and the 
reliability of eyewitness identification,
 the New Jersey 
Supreme Court recog nized that “[s]cience has proven that memory 
is malleable.  The body of eyewitness identification research 1413
                     
12 The Utah test for reliability, based on the considerations enunciated 
in Long, are:  
 
(1) [T]he opportunity of the witness to view the actor 
during the event; (2) the witness’ s degree of attention to 
the actor at the tim e of the event; (3) the witness’ s 
capacity to observe the event, including his or her 
physical and mental acuity; (4) whether the witn ess’s 
identification was made spontaneously and remained 
consistent thereafter, or whether it was the product of 
suggestion; and (5) the nature of the event being observed 
and the likelihood that the witness would p
erceive, 
remember and relate it correctly.  
 
Ramirez, 817 P.2d at 781 (quoting Long, 721 P.2d at 493).  Utah courts have  
also identified expert testimony as an effective means of assisting jurors  
with determining eyewitness identification reliability.  See, e.g. , State v.  
Clopten, 223 P.3d 1103, 1108 -15 (Utah 2009).   
 
13  We discussed Henderson  in Cabagbag.   See 127 Hawaiʻi at 312- 13. 
 
14 Henderson was based in large part on the findings of a Special Master, 
who was appointed to evaluate hundreds of scientific studies, preside over 
hearings, hear testimony from seven experts, and issue an extensive report 
regarding human memory and the reliability of eyewitness identifications.  
Henderson, 27 A.3d at 877 -78.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
37 
 further reveals that an array of variables can affect and dilute 
memory and lead to misidentifications.”  Henderson, 27 A.3d at 
895.
  Henderson recognized that, in practice, many New Jersey 
courts treated the Biggers  factors as a checklist without 
considering the effects of other variables on the reliability of 
the identification within the totality of the circumstances.  
Henderson, 27 A.3d at 919.   15
 The New Jersey Supreme Court announced a new, non-
exhaustive list of twenty- two reliability factors to be 
considered within the totality of the circumstances by a court 
when ruling on the admissibility of an eyewitness 
16identification.  27 A.3d at 920- 23.   The New Jersey Supreme 
Court ruled that for a defendant to  obtain a pretrial hearing on 
the admissibility of an eyewitness identification, the 
“defendant has the initial burden of showing some evidence of 
suggestiveness” due to one or more system variables “that could 
                     
15  The New Jersey Supreme Court  also raised concerns that three of the 
Biggers factors —  the witness’s opportunity to view the crime, the witness’s 
degree of attention, and the witness’s level of certainty at the time of 
identification —  rely on witness self -reporting, which may be affected by 
suggestive procedure.  Henderson, 27 A.3d at 918.  
 
16  The New Jersey Supreme Court divided the factors into (1) “system 
variables,” which are factors that  are within the control of the criminal 
justice system, such as police procedure, and (2) “estimator variables,” 
which are factors “related to the witness, the perpetrator, of the event 
itself —  like distance, light, or stress — over which the legal system  has no 
control.”  Henderson, 27 A.3d at 878, 895- 96, 920-23.     
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
38 (continued. . .)  
 lead to a mistaken identification.”17  27 A.3d at 920.  To avoid 
suppression of the identification, the prosecution would then be 
                     
17 “System variables,” factors that are within the control of the criminal 
justice system, laid out by Henderson include:  
 
1. Blind Administration.   Was the lineup procedure 
performed double -blind?  [Where the administrator does not 
know which lineup member is the subject.]  If double- blind 
testing was impractical, did the police use a technique . . 
. to ensure that the administrator had no knowledge of 
where the suspect appeared in the photo array or lineup?  
 
2. Pre-identification Instructions.   Did the administrator 
provide neutral, pre -identification instructions warning 
that the suspect may not be present in the lineup and that  
the witness should not feel compelled to make an  
identification?  
 
3. Lineup Construction.   Did the array or lineup contain  
only one suspect embedded among at least five innocent  
fillers?  Did the suspect stand out from other members of  
the lineup?  
 
4. Feedback.   Did the witness receive any information or  
feedback, about the suspect or the crime, before, during,  
or after the identification procedure?  
 
5. Recording Confidence.   Did the administrator record the  
witness' statement of confidence immediately after the 
identification, before the possibility of any confirmatory  
feedback? 
 
6. Multiple Viewings.   Did the witness view the suspect  
more than once as part of multiple identification  
procedures?  Did police use the same fillers more than  
once? 
 
. . . . 
 
[7.] Private Actors.   Did law enforcement elicit from the  
eyewitness whether he or she had spoken with anyone about  
the identification and, if so, what was discussed?  
 
[8.] Other Identifications Made.   Did the eyewitness  
initially make no choice or choose a different suspect or  
filler? 
 
27 A.3d at 920.  The New Jersey Supreme Court later revised this framework to  
allow a defendant to trigger a pretrial hearing due to estimator variables as 
well as system variables.  State v. Chen, 27 A.3d 930, 943 (N.J. 2011); see 
also State v. Almaraz , 301 P.3d 242, 252 -53 (Idaho 2013) (adopting system 
variables as threshold considerations for whether a pre -trial hearing on a ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
39 (continued. . .)  
 required to offer proof at the hearing, accounting for both 
system and estimator variables, that the identification is 
reliable.  27 A.3d at 919.  The ultimate burden in Ne
w Jersey, 
however, remained with the defendant “to prove a very 
substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification.”  27 
A.3d at 920.18   
                                                                  
(continued. . .) 
motion to suppress an eyewitness identification allegedly procured from 
suggestive police procedure is necessary).  
 
18  Hawaiʻi law requir es a “very substantial likelihood of irreparable 
misidentification” 
based on a totality of circumstances for suppression of 
identification.  Padilla, 57 Haw. at 154, 552 P.2d at 360.  Padilla  cited to 
the United States Supreme Court opinion in Simmons v. United States, 390 U.S.  
377, 384 (1968) for this test.  With respect to the burden in cases 
challenging identifications, the United States Supreme Court  
 
applie[s] a two-step inquiry: First, the defendant has the burden 
of showing that the eyewitness identification was derived through 
“impermissibly suggestive” means.   Simmons, 390 U.S. at 384, 88 
S.Ct. 967.  [S]econd, if the defendant meets that  burden, courts 
consider whether the  identification was reliable under the 
totality of the circumstances.  That step entails considering the 
witness'[s] opportunity to view the perpetrator, degree of 
attention, accuracy of description, level of certainty, and the 
time between the crime and pretrial confrontation, then weighing 
such factors against the  “corrupting effect of the 
suggestive identification .”  Braithwaite, 432 U.S.[] at 108, 114, 
97 S.Ct. 2243.  Most identifications will be admissible.  The 
standard of “fairness as required by the Due Process 
Clause,” id., at 113, 97 S.Ct. 2243, however, demands that a 
subset of the most unreliable identifications —those carrying a “ 
‘very substantial likelih ood of . . . misidentification’” —will be 
excluded.  Biggers, 409 U.S.[] at 198, 93 S.Ct. 375 . 
 
Perry, 565 U.S. at 253-54.  Thus, a defendant challenging an eyewitness 
identification has the initial burden to show that the identification was 
“impermissibly suggestive.”  The court then independently analyzes whether 
there is a “very substantial likelihood of misidentification” under the 
totality of circumstances.  To the extent  Hawaiʻi cases state that  
 
[w]hen the defendant challenges admissibility 
of eyewitness identification  on the grounds of impermissibly 
suggestive pre- trial identification procedure, he or she has 
the burden of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is faced 
with two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
40 (continued. . .)  
  Thus, in determining whether suggestive identifications 
should be admissible, New Jersey requires courts to employ a 
totality of the circumstances test considering reliability 
19variables set forth in Henderson .   27 A.3d at 919.   Other 
states have since expressly adopted New Jersey’s Henderson 
framework.  See, e.g., State v. Harris, 191 A.3d 119, 143 –44 
20(Conn. 2018); Young, 374 P.3d at 427 -28.       
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon viewing 
the totality of the circumstances, such as opportunity to view at 
the time of the crime, the degree of attention, and the elapsed 
time, the witness's  identification is deemed sufficiently 
reliable so that it is worthy of presentation to and 
consideration by the jury ,  
 
Walton, 133 Hawaiʻ i at 83, 324 P.3d at 893, an interpretation of this phrase 
placing the burden of proof on the defendant to establish factor (2) would 
not comport with the standard of “fairness as required by the Due Process 
Clause” of the federal constitution.  Manson, 432 U.S. at 113. 
 
19 Under New Jersey’s new test, the court may end the pretrial hearing at 
any time if the court determines the defendant’s suggestiveness accusation is 
groundless.  Henderson , 27 A.3d at 920.   
 
20 The Idaho Supreme Court decided to maintain the two -part test from 
Biggers/ Manson, in which a court considering whether to grant a motion to 
suppress an eyewitness identification must first determine whether the 
“identification procedures are overly suggestive,” and, if they are, then 
“examine whether the reliability of the identificat ion outweighs the 
corrupting effect of the suggestive identification.”  Almaraz, 301 P.3d at 
252.  Referencing Henderson , however, the Idaho Supreme Court held that Idaho 
courts must consider system variables when determining the suggestiveness of 
the procedure, and then consider estimator variables within the application 
of the Biggers
 factors to determine reliability and admissibility.  301 P.3d 
at 252-53; see also State v. Moore , 430 P.3d 1278, 128 0 (Idaho 2018)  
(applying eyewitness identification reliability test announced in Almaraz).  
 Other states have adopted some other factors in the 
reliability/admissibility analysis.  Vermont has abandoned the Biggers  
“witness certainty” reliability factor based on empirical research indicating 
that witness certainty is easily corrupted by suggestive procedure.  See 
State v. Discola, 184 A.3d 1177, 1188 –89 (Vt. 2018); see also Commonwealth v.  
Gomes, 22 N.E.3d 897 (Mass. 2015)  (requiring juries to be instructed on 
principles affecting reliability), abrogated on other grounds   by 
Commonwealth v. Bastaldo, 32 N.E.3d 873 (Mass. 2015)  (building  
on Gomes regarding application of cross -racial identification instruction);  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
41 
 3. Revised Admissibility Criteria  
 We did not adopt New Jersey’s twenty- two factor “system” 
and “estimator” reliability  factors.  See  Cabagbag, 127 Hawai ʻi 
at 314, 277 P.3d at 1039.  Instead, we set out 
thirteen factors, 
now reflected in Hawaiʻi Standard Instruction 3.19, that a judge 
should consider including in a jury instruction regarding the 
reliability of an eyewitness identification.   Factors a judge 
should consider in addressing whether an impermissibly 
suggestive eyewitness or show- up identification is nonetheless 
sufficiently reliable to be admitted into evidence should not 
differ from the factors a judge should consider including in a 
jury instruction regarding reliability.  We therefore agree with 
New Jersey, Utah, and other states that the factors a jury must 
consider in evaluating the reliability of an eyewitness or show-
up identification must also be considered by a trial court in 
addressing admissibility of an impermissibly suggestive 
eyewitness or show- up identification.   
 Thus, we prospectively hold that trial courts must, at 
minimum, consider any relevant factors set out in the Hawai ʻi 
Standard Instructions governing eyewitness and show -up 
identifications, as may be amended, as well as any other 
                                                                  
(continued. . .)  
State v. Lawson, 291 P.3d 673 (Or. 2012)  (limiting admissibility of  
eyewitness identifications based on rules of evidence).  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
42 
 relevant factors that may be set out in binding precedent in 
addressing whether, under a totality of circumstances, an 
impermissibly suggestive eyewitness or show
-up identification is 
nonetheless sufficiently reliable to be admissible in evidence.   
 As th is holding sets  forth a new rule that expressly 
overrules precedent upon which parties have regulated their 
conduct, it will only apply prospectively to admissibility 
determinations made after the date of this opinion.    21
C. Prospectively, J udges Must Also Consider the Impact of 
 Suggestive Procedures as a P art of the A dmissibility of 
 Determinatio n 
 Padilla only required a trial judge to address 
suggestiveness as a threshold issue; if an eyewitness 
identification was determined to have been procured through an 
impermissibly suggestive procedure, Padilla required the trial 
court to evaluate five factors under the totality of the 
circumstances to determine whether the identification is 
nonetheless sufficiently reliable to be admitted in evidence. 
                     
21 See Auld, 136 Hawai ʻi at 256, 361 P.3d at 483 (“The ‘paradigm case ’ 
warranting a prospective -only application of a new rule arises ‘when a court 
expressly overrules a precedent upon which the contest would otherwise be 
decided differently and by which the parties may previously have regulated 
their conduct.’ ”) (citations omitted); State v.  Jess, 117 Hawaiʻ i 381, 400 -02, 
184 P.3d 133, 152-54 (2008) (summarizing our case law on the retroactivity of 
new rules); Cabagbag, 127 Hawai ʻi at 31
7, 277 P.3d at 104 2 (holding that a new  
rule requiring a jury instruction on eyewitness identification in certain 
circumstances would have prospective effect only).  Although “judicial 
decisions are assumed to apply retroactively,” when this court “announces a 
‘new rule,’ then this court may, in its discretion, determine that the 
interests of fairness preclude retroactive application of the new rule.”  
State v. Ketchum , 97 Hawai ʻi 107, 123 n.26, 34 P.3d 1006, 1022 n.26 (2001).   
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
43 
 Padilla, 57 Haw. at 154, 552 P.2d at 360.  Suggestiveness 
itself, however, was not one of the five factors to be 
considered by a trial court to determine admissibility. 
 As noted earlier, however, various courts, including the 
Utah Supreme Court, now also require consideration of whether an 
identification was the product of suggestion as a part of a 
trial court’s reliability evaluation determining whether an 
eyewitness identification should be admitted into evidence.  See  
Long, 721 P.2d at 493.  For it is known that human memory, and 
therefore reliability, can also be distorted and affected by 
suggestive police procedures.  
See Henderson, 27 A.3d at 894- 95.  
In fact, in the 1977 Manson case, decided five years after 
Biggers, the United States Supreme Court itself reaffirmed the 
Biggers test,  but noted that the factors indicating reliability 
should be weighed against the “corrupting effect of the 
suggestive identification itself.”   Manson, 432 U.S. at 114.  
 In this regard, e yewitnesses who receive “a simple post -
identification confirmation regarding the accuracy of their 
identification significantly inflate their reports to suggest 
better witnessing conditions at the time of the crime, stro
nger 
memory at the time of the lineup, and sharper memory abilities 
in general.”  Henderson, 27 A.3d at 899 (citations omitted).  
Moreover, s uggestiveness in police conduct — intentional or 
unintentional — may undermine the independence and accuracy of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
44 
 the 
witness’s recollection and subsequent identification.  See 
Perry, 565 U.S. at 251 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (citation 
omitted) (“Our precedents make no distinction between 
intentional and unintentional suggestion.  To the contrary, they 
explicitly state that ‘[s]uggestion can be created intentionally 
or unintentionally in many subtle ways.’”); see also, Gomes, 22 
N.E.3d at 915 (discussing impacts of suggestiveness on witness 
confidence).  Thus, Alaska has also held that any suggestiveness 
in procuring an eyewitness identification — irrespective of 
whether it be an “impermissible” or “unnecessary” suggestion — 
requires an evaluation of reliability by the court .  See Young, 
374 P.3d at 426.   
 Therefore, it is clear that suggestive procedures can also 
affect the reliability of eyewitness identifications and should 
be considered in the admissibility determination.  To counteract 
possible effects of suggestive procedures on reliability, we 
therefore also prospectively hold that in addressing 
admissibility of a suggestive eyewitness or show-up 
identification, trial courts must also consider the effect of 
the suggestiveness on the reliability of the identification in 
determining whether it should be admitted into evidence.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
45 
 D. Prospectively, When Applicable, Juries  Must Also Be 
Instructed To Consider the Impact of S uggestive Procedures 
as a Part of the Reliability D etermination  
Correspondingly, we hold that when an identification has 
been procured through a suggestive eyewitness or show- up 
identification procedure or when the eyewitness or show- up 
identification is central to the case, the jury must also be 
instructed to consider the impact of the any suggestive 
procedures on the reliability of the eyewitness or show- up 
identification.  Although Hawai ʻi Standard Instruction 3.19A 
regarding show-up identification recognizes this by including as 
a factor “[w]hether the identification was the result of a 
suggestive procedure, including actions taken or words spoken by 
police or anyone else to the witness before, during, or after 
the identification process,” 
Hawaiʻi Standard Instruction 3.19 
regarding “Eyewitness Testimony” does not, and it should 
therefore be amended to also include this language from Hawai ʻi 
Standard Instruction 3.19A.22  
                     
22 In addition, in Cabagbag, we noted that  an eyewitness’s heightened 
confidence regarding the accuracy of an identification may not correlate with 
heightened reliability of the identification, and we noted that although 
empirical research has also undermined the seemingly common sense notion that 
the confidence of the witness is a valid indicator of the accuracy of the 
identification, courts and juries continue to place great weight on the 
confidence expressed by  the witness in assessing reliability.  Cabagbag, 127 
Hawai‘i at 311, 277 P.3d at 1036 .  The Utah Supreme Court explicitly rejected 
the Biggers “level of certainty” factor based on studies indicating that 
suggestive police procedures may influence a witnes s’s confidence.  See Long, 
721 P.2d at 490.  The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court also notes the 
impact of suggestiveness on witness confidence.  Gomes, 22 N.E.3d at 915.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
46 
  
As this holding also sets forth a new rule, it applies 
prospectively to events occurring after publication of this 
decision, i.e., to jury instructions given after the date of 
this opinion.  
E. Other Considerations  
 
We also note that a trial court’s ruling that an 
identification is admissible does not affect the State’s burden 
at trial to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the identity of the 
defendant as the perpetrator of the alleged crime.  In this 
sense, the judge and the jury may come to differing conclusions 
regarding the reliability of an admitted eyewitness 
identification.  See Cabinatan, 132 Hawai ʻi at 77, 
319 P.3d at 
1085 (“[A] trial court may determine that a suggestive  show-up 
identification is sufficiently reliable to be admissible. 
However, the jury is not bound by that determination and is free 
to consider the issues of suggestiveness and reliability in 
determining whether to credit the identification.”); see also, 
Ramirez, 817 P.2d at 778-79  (discussing overlapping but distinct 
roles of the judge and jury in determining whether proffered 
eyewitness identification is reliable).  By the same token, a 
judge in a bench trial who receives evidence of a suggestive 
eyewitness identification should consider relevant factors to 
evaluate its reliability in determining whether the 
identification should be credited or discredited.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
47 
  Finally, w e note that factors affecting reliability are not 
set in stone.  Reliability is a totality of the circumstances 
determination that can encompass more than the 
factors that are 
included in our standard instructions or discussed in this 
opinion.  See State v. Kazanas
, 138 Hawai ʻi 23, 39, 375 P.3d  
1261, 1277 (2016) (citations omitted) (viewing a “‘totality of 
the circumstances’ review as sweeping in any circumstance,
 
without limitation, for the court’s consideration.”) .  The 
understanding of factors affecting reliability, including 
suggestiveness, continues to evolve based on emerging empirical 
research.  Therefore, it is also possible that some of the 
factors currently contained in our instructions could be amended 
23or deleted.   Courts should also consider credible evidence  
presented by the parties regarding the reliability of a 
particular identi fication based on scientifically-supported 
reliability factors.  See  Gomes, 22 N.E.3d at 918 (noting that  
provisional jury instructions were not intended to preclude  
expert testimony , which may “be important to elaborate on the  
generally accepted [reliability] principles in a model  
instruction and to explain how other variables relevant to the  
particular case can affect the accuracy of the  
identification.”); see also, Clopten, 223 P.3d 1103, 1108-15  
                     
23  See, e.g., the discussions regarding the “witness certainty” factor in 
notes 15, 20, and 22, supra. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  ̒
 
48 
 (discussing expert testimony as an effective mean
s of assisting 
jurors with determining eyewitness identification reliability).  
V. Conclusion 
 As explained above, however, the circuit court did not err 
in finding Laraway’s show -up identification reliable under the 
Padilla test in place at the time, and therefore did not err in 
denying Kaneaiakala’s motion to suppress.  Accordingly, the 
ICA’s November 24, 2017 Judgment on Appeal, filed pursuant to 
its November 7, 2017 SDO, is affirmed.  
Michael J. Park     
   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
      
/s/ Michael D. Wilson    for petitioner  
Loren J. Thomas 
for respondents 
 
 
 
