*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
E. KALANI FLORES, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
ARTHUR LOGAN IN HIS CAPACITY AS CHIEF OF POLICE 
OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU; PAUL FERREIRA IN HIS 
CAPACITY AS CHIEF OF POLICE OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI ʻI 
POLICE DEPARTMENT; JOHN PELLETIER IN HIS CAPACITY AS
 
CHIEF OF POLICE OF MAUI COUNTY, 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  1
 
 
SCWC-19-0000841 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-19-0000841; CIV. NO. 3CC191000190) 
 
JULY 12, 2022 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAYAMA, J.  
 
This case arises from the controversy surrounding the 
construction of the T hirty Meter Telescope (TMT)  on Mauna Kea, 
                     
1  Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1)  (2010), 
Arthur Logan , Chief of Police of the City and County of Honolulu , has been 
substituted as a party in place of former Chief of Police Susan Ballard, and 
John Pelletier, Chief of Police of Maui County , has been substituted as a 
party in place of former Chief of Police Tivoli Faaumu.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000841
12-JUL-2022
09:19 AM
Dkt. 62 OPA*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
2 located on the Island of Hawaiʻi.  Petitioner/Plaintiff -Appellant 
E. Kalani Flores (Flores) challenged the presence of police 
officers from the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) and Maui 
County Police Department (MP D), who were assisting the Hawaiʻi 
County Police Department (HCPD) within the County of Hawaiʻi.  
The Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court) 
determined that Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 52D-5 does not 
provide for a private right of action a nd dismissed Flores’s 
complaint.  
On certiorari, Flores argues that the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals (ICA) erroneously affirmed the circuit court’s 
“Order Granting Defendant Susan Ballard’s Motion to Dismiss” 
(Order Granting M otion to Dismiss).  We hold that the circuit 
court did not err when it dismissed Flores’s complaint because 
there is no private right of action pursuant to HRS §  52D-5.  In 
addition, the ICA correctly determined that mutual aid between 
police departments of different counties is allo wed under Hawaiʻi 
law.  Accordingly, the ICA did not err by affirming the circuit 
court’s Order Granting Motion to Dismiss and we affirm the ICA’s  
Judgment on Appeal.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
3 I. BACKGROUND  
A. Factual Background  
In 2014, Flores requested that the Board of Land and 
Natural Resources  (the Board)  hold a contested case hearing 
prior to approving a sublease of land on Mauna Kea from the 
University of Hawaiʻi to the TMT International Observatory for 
the purpose of constructing the TMT.  Flores v. Bd. of Land & 
Nat. Res. , 143 Hawaiʻi 114, 117 -18, 424 P.3d 469, 472 -73 (2018).  
The Board denied Flores’s request for a contested case hearing 
and Flores appealed to the Environmental Court of the Third 
Circuit (environmental court), which agreed that Flores had a 
constitutional right t o a contested case hearing.  Id. at 116, 
424 P.3d at 471.  On secondary appeal, this court reversed the 
environmental court’s decision and held that Flores had a 
“constitutionally cognizable property interest,” id. at 126, 424 
P.3d at 481, but “was not ent itled to a contested case hearing 
regarding whether  [the Board]  should consent to the Sublease.”  
Id. at 128, 424 P.3d at 483.  Thus, construction of the TMT was 
allowed to proceed after years of legal challenges.  
On July 13, 2019, Flores and a number of o ther people 
assembled at Puʻu Huluhulu near the access road  to Mauna Kea ’s 
summit after police officers blocked public access to Mauna 
Kea’s summit .  At Puʻu Huluhulu , Flores and the group engaged in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
4 religious rituals and expressed their reverence for Mauna Kea 
and opposition to the TMT project while blocking the access 
road.  On July 15, 2019,  the Chief of HCPD, 
Respondent/Defendant -Appellee Paul Ferreira (Chief Ferre ira), 
and the Chief of HPD, Respondent/Defendant -Appellee  Susan 
Ballard (Chief Ballard),  entered into an interdepartmental 
assignment agreement pursuant to HRS §  78-27 (2012),2 in which 
                     
2  HRS § 78-27 (2012) provides:  
 
Temporary inter - and intra -governmental assignments 
and exchanges.   (a) With the approval of the respective 
employer, a gover nmental unit of this State may participate 
in any program of temporary inter - or intra -governmental 
assignments or exchanges of employees as a sending or 
receiving agency.  “Agency” means any local, national, or 
foreign governmental agency or private agenc y with 
government sponsored programs or projects.  
(b) As a sending agency, a governmental unit of this 
State may consider its employee on a temporary assignment 
or exchange as being on detail to a regular work assignment 
or on leave of absence without pay from the employee’s 
position.  The employee on temporary assignment or exchange 
shall be entitled to the same rights and benefits as any 
other employee of the sending agency.  
(c) As a receiving agency, a governmental unit of 
this State shall not consider t he employee on a temporary 
assignment or exchange who is detailed from the sending 
agency as its employee, except for the purpose of 
disability or death resulting from personal injury arising 
out of an d in the course of the temporary assignment or 
exchange .  The employee on detail may not receive a salary 
from the receiving agency, but the receiving agency may pay 
for or reimburse the sending agency for the costs, or any 
portion of the costs, of salaries, benefits, and travel and 
transportation expenses if it will benefit from the 
assignment or exchange.  
(d) An agreement consistent with this section  and 
policies of the employer shall be made between the sending 
and receiving agencies  on matters relating to the 
assignment or exchange, including but not limite d to 
supervision of duties, costs of salary and benefits, and 
travel and transportation expenses ; provided that the 
agreement shall not diminish any rights or benefits to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
5 Chief Ferreira delegated police authority to HPD officers who 
were tem porarily assigned to support HCPD operations relating to 
the TMT construction project.  On July 16, 2019,  the Chief of  
MPD, Respondent/Defendant -Appellee Tivoli Faaumu (Chief Faaumu), 
entered into an identical interdepartmental assignment agreement 
with Chief Ferreira (collectively, the Inter -Departmental 
Agreements).3 
On July 16, 2019, HPD  and MPD officers arrived on the 
Island of Hawaiʻi to provide support to HCPD.  Chief Ferreira 
deputized the assisting officers from HPD and MPD and instructed 
                     
which an employee of a governmental unit of this State is 
entitled under this section . 
(e) As a receiving agency, a governmental unit of 
this State may give the employee of the sending agency on a 
temporary assignment  or exchange an exempt appointment  and 
grant the employee rights and benefits as other exempt 
appointees of the receiving ag ency if it will benefit from 
the assignment or exchange.  
(Emphasis added .) 
 
3  The Inter -Departmental Agreements contained the following recitals:  
 
WHEREAS, HCPD desires the services of [HPD/MPD] 
personnel and [HPD/MPD] has agreed to the temporary 
assignme nt of [HPD/MPD] personnel and to support and manage 
police operations in conjunction with the Thirty Meter 
Telescope Project (“TMT Project”) and  any other assignment 
as deemed necessary by the HCPD Chief of Police or his 
designee with the approval of [HPD/ MPD]; and  
WHEREAS, this employment is a temporary 
interdepartmental assignment and this employment is made 
under the provisions of [HRS  §] 78-27(a-d). 
While the Inter -Departmental Agreements cite d HRS § 78 -27 as authority for 
the inter -department assignmen ts from HPD and MPD to HCPD , the “Delegation of 
Police Authority” attached to each agreement (Delegations) cite d HRS § 52D-5 
as authority for Chief Ferreira to deputize the assisting officers to act in 
a law enforcement capacity within the County of Hawaiʻi. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
6 them to as sist with clearing the access road to Mauna Kea’s 
summit so that the construction equipment could proceed.  HPD 
officers assisted Chief Ferreira until July 17, 2019, and then 
withdrew once it was determined that their assistance was no 
longer needed.4 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings5 
On July 17, 2019, Flores filed a “Complaint for 
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief” in the circuit court naming 
Chief Ballard, Chief Faaumu, and Chief Ferreira (collectively, 
the Chiefs of Police)  as Defendants .  Flores challenged the  
presence and legal authority of police officers from HPD and MPD 
within the County of Hawaiʻi.  Flores’s complaint alleged that 
the Chiefs of Police violated HRS §  52D-56 by using HPD and MPD 
                     
4  Presumably, MPD officers also withdrew on July 17, 2019.  
 
5  The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto  presided. 
 
6  HRS § 52D-5 (2012)  provides : 
 
Powers of the chief of police outside own county.   
The chief of police of each county and any duly authorized 
subordinates shall have and may exercise all powers, 
privileges, and authority necessary to enforce the laws of 
the State, in a county other than the county in and for 
which the chief has been ap pointed, if:  
(1) The exercise of such power, privilege, and 
authority is required in the pursuit of any 
investigation commenced within the county in and for 
which the chief has been appointed ; and 
(2) The concurrence of the chief of police of the 
county in  which the power, privilege, and authority 
sought to be exercised is obtained.  
(Emphasis added.)  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
7 officers to assist HCPD and that the HPD and MPD officers lacke d 
legal authority to exercise police powers within the County of 
Hawaiʻi.  Flores sought as relief (1)  a judgment declaring that 
the Chiefs of Police violated HRS §  52D-5 by using HPD and MPD 
officers within the County of Hawaiʻi; (2) preliminary and 
permanent injunctions prohibiting the Chiefs of Police from 
violating HRS §  52D-5; (3) a temporary restraining order;7 and 
(4) attorney’s fees pursuant to the private attorney general 
doctrine.  
Chief Ballard filed a motion to dismiss Flores’s 
complaint (M otion to Dismiss) pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6).8  Chief Ballard argued that 
Flores’s complaint failed to state a claim upon which relief 
could be granted because there is no private right of action for 
which a plaintiff can seek a remedy for an alleged violation of 
HRS § 52D-5.  Citing to Whitey’s Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali -
Kauai Boat Charters, Inc. , 110 Hawaiʻi 302, 312, 132 P.3d 1213, 
1223 (2006), as corrected  (Apr. 25, 2006),  Chief Ballard 
                     
7  Flores also filed an ex parte motion seeking a temporary restraining 
order enjoining HPD and MPD officers from assisting HCPD with “keeping 
roadways clear for the movement of construction equipment and vehicles on 
Hawaiʻi Island, and any police activities related thereto, including, but not 
limited to, effectuating arrests, traffic control, [and] transportation of 
detainees” in the area of the protests.  (Internal quotation marks omitted .) 
 
8  HRCP Rule 12(b) (2000) provides in relevant part “that the following 
defenses may at the option of the pleader be made by motion:  . . . (6) 
failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
8 contended that HRS §  52D-5 does not create a private right of 
action based on the  
following factors: (1)  whether the plaintiff is “one of the 
class for whose especial benefit the statute was enacted ”; 
(2) whether there is “any indication of legislative intent, 
explicit or implicit,  either to create such a remedy or to 
deny one ”; and (3)  whether a private right of action would 
be “consistent with the underlying purposes of the 
legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the 
plaintiff. ” 
Applying these factors to HRS §  52D-5, Chief B allard argued that 
(1) the statute was enacted to  protect local jurisdictions from 
outside investigators and to assure cooperation between the 
chiefs of police ; (2) the statute expresses no legislative 
intent to create a private remedy; and (3)  a private r emedy 
would be inconsistent with the purpose of the statutory scheme.  
Chief Ballard also argued that Flores’s claim was moot because 
HPD officers were no longer on the Island of Hawaiʻi for any 
purpose relating to the TMT.  
Chief Faaumu joined in Chief Ballard’s M otion to 
Dismiss.  Chief Faaumu agreed with Chief Ballard’s arguments 
that there is no private right of action for alleged violations 
of HRS §  52D-5 and that the case was moot.  
Chief Ferreira also joined in Chief Ballard’s M otion 
to Dismiss  and agreed that there is no private right of action 
for alleged violations of HRS §  52D-5.  Chief Ferreira took no *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
9 position on whether the case was moot because this argument did 
not apply to him as Chief of HCPD.  
On September 12, 2019, Flores filed a memorand um in 
opposition to Chief Ballard’s M otion to Dismiss (Opposition).  
Flores argue d that (1)  HRS § 52D-5 creates an implied private 
right of action ; and (2) his case was not moot because 
exceptions to the mootness doctrine applied.  Without seeking 
leave of  the circuit court, Flores attached to his Opposition a 
declaration by Flores, a declaration by Flores’s counsel, and 
“Exhibits” (1) through (8).9 
On September 17, 2019, Chief Ballard filed a reply 
memorandum in which she argued, inter alia , that (1)  the 
declarations and exhibits attached to Flores’s Opposition were 
improper and should be ignored ; (2) HRS § 52D-5 was not 
implicated by HPD and MPD officers responding to Chief 
Ferreira’s request for assistance ; and (3) the intergovernmental 
assignment of poli ce officers from HPD and MPD to HCPD was 
authorized by HRS §  78-27. 
On September 18, 2019,  Flores filed an ex parte  motion 
for leave to file a supplemental declaration and three 
additional exhibits in support of Flores’s Opposition.  A 
                     
9  The exhibits ar e various news articles documenting assistance by HPD 
and MPD on Mauna Kea and letters and emails from Flores’s counsel to the 
respective county counsel requesting assurance that HPD and MPD would not 
assist HCPD with regard to the TMT operations again.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
10 declaration by Flore s’s counsel and “Proposed Exhibits” (9) 
through (11) were appended to the ex parte  motion (Supplemental 
Filing).  
On September 19, 2019, the circuit  court granted 
Flores’s ex parte  motion and ordered that the declaration of 
counsel and Proposed Exhibits (9)  through (11) be included in 
Flores’s Opposition.10 
The circuit court heard Chief Ballard’s M otion to 
Dismiss and Chief Faaumu’s and Chief Ferreira’s joinders on 
September 20, 2019.  Regarding Chief Ballard’s claim that the 
Inter-Departmental Agreements wer e authorized by HRS §  78-27, 
Flores argued that HRS §  78-27 did not provide legal authority 
for HPD and MPD to exercise police powers on the Island of 
Hawaiʻi.  After hearing argument, the circuit court made an oral 
ruling: 
The Court notes that the Court h as reviewed the 
legislative history of [HRS §  52D-5] . . . . 
The Court views as the purpose is [sic] to provide 
continuity to police investigations from one county 
jurisdiction to another and to also protect the local 
control and assure its cooperation thr ough the provisions 
of notification to a county chief of police when 
investigations are to be pursued within this jurisdiction 
or a jurisdiction.  
                     
10  In the declaration, Flores’s counsel attested that he required further 
discovery and was still waiting for the Chiefs of Police to produce 
documents.  Despite the fact that Flores sought leave to supplement his 
Opposition with matters outside the pleading s, Flores claimed “this case is 
not ripe for summary judgment because discovery is outstanding.”  
 Exhibits (9) through (11) are the responses to Flores’s first request 
for production of documents by Chief Ferreira, Chief Faaumu, and Chief 
Ballard, respecti vely, including copies of the Inter -Departmental Agreements.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
11 So the Court concludes that there is no private right 
of action pursuant to HRS Section 52D -5.  Therefore, the  
motion to dismiss is granted.  
(Emphasis added .) 
  On November 12, 2019, the circuit court entered the 
Order Granting M otion to Dismiss, citing as the reason for the 
decision that “there is no private right of action pursuant to 
[HRS] § 52D-5.”11  The circuit court also entered Judgment in 
favor of the Chiefs of Police and against Flores on November 12, 
2019. 
C. ICA Proceeding s 
1. Opening Brief  
On December 6, 2019 , Flores filed a notice of appeal.  
Flores argued that the circuit court erred by concluding that 
HRS § 52D -5 does not provide a private right of action .12   
  First, Flores argued that the language of HRS §  52D-5 
evinces a legislative intent to include a private right of 
action.  Flores reasoned that because the Legislature included a 
“territorial limi t[]” on where police officers can exercise 
their police powers, HRS §  52D-5 creates a right entitling 
Flores to be “free from off island county police officers 
                     
11  The circuit court never ruled on Chief Ballard’s objections to the two 
declarations and eight exhibits attached to Flore s’s Opposition.  
 
12 Although Flores’s opening brief stated four points of  error, each 
alleged error is actually an argument for why HRS §  52D-5 includes a private 
right of action.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
12 exercising police powers on Hawaiʻi Island.”  Flores also 
intimated that a police officer making an arrest outside of the 
officer’s home county violates the arrestee’s Fourth Amendment 
rights.  Flores further asserted that when enacting HRS §  52D-5, 
the Legislature included the “requirement  of hometown 
origination to avert the evil of off island county police 
invasion” because “off island police” are more likely to violate 
an individual’s rights.  According to Flores, the Legislature 
“did not envision or intend for off island police to go to  
another jurisdiction” except to investigate  a crime related to 
“their home turf.”  
  Second, Flores argued that HRS §  52D-5 implicitly 
contains a private right of action in order to allow judicial 
review of “illegitimate police activity beyond a county pol ice’s 
home territory .”  Flores contended that if the Legislature 
actually intended to preclude a private right of action, and 
thus escape judicial review, “that preclusion violates the 
separation of powers doctrine.”  Flores maintained that because 
the Hawaiʻi Attorney General acquiesced and supported the actions 
of the Chiefs of Police, which violated HRS §  52D-5, there must 
be an implied right of action available to facilitate judicial 
review of police activity outside an officer’s home 
jurisdiction.  Flores argued that his complaint seeking *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
13 declaratory relief was consistent with the private attorney 
general doctrine , which permits a private citizen to  collect 
attorney’s fees when  enforcing an alleged violation of state law 
where the government has failed to do so.  
Third, Flores argued that HRS §  52D-5 must include a 
private right of action because it lacks an explicit penalty or 
any other mechanism for enforcement.  Flores maintained that 
Hawaiʻi case law precludes a private right of action for tort 
damages only in statutes which already contain enforcement or 
penalty mechanisms, which HRS §  52D-5 does not.  Flores also 
contended that it is an open question whether  declaratory and 
injunctive relief  are available when a statute contains an 
enforcement mechanism . 
2. Answering Brief  
The Chiefs of Police filed an answering brief on 
August 5, 2020 . 
  First, the Chiefs of Police  argued that the mutual aid 
provided by HPD and MPD to Chief Ferreira was authorized by HRS 
§ 78-27, rather than HRS §  52D-5 which is Hawaiʻi’s “hot [or 
fresh] pursuit” statute.  The Chiefs of Police  contended that 
HRS § 78-27 is Hawaiʻi’s “mutual aid” sta tute, which allows for  
mutual aid  — including mutual aid for police services — so long 
as an oral or written agreement exists between the sending and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
14 receiving agencies.  The Chiefs of Police  explained that in this 
case, Chief Ferreira entered into written  agreements with Chief 
Ballard and Chief Faaumu for the inter -departmental assignment 
of police officers.13 
Second, the Chiefs of Police  argued that because 
HRS § 78-27 authorize d the mutual aid that Flores challenged, 
the ICA need not reach the issue of  whether the mutual aid was 
authorized under HRS § 52D-5.  However, the Chiefs of Police  
maintained that the circuit court decision could also be 
affirmed on the basis of HRS §  52D-5 because (1)  Flores was not 
arrested and thus could not challenge whether HPD and MPD had 
legal authority to act within the County of Hawaiʻi; (2) HRS 
§ 52D-5 does not create a private right of action;14 and 
(3) Chief Ferreira’s power to deputize HPD and MPD officers is 
                     
13 The Chiefs of Police  also cited HRS §  127A-12(c)(2) (Supp. 2017) as a 
statutory basis for mutual aid during emergencies.  HRS §  127A-12(c)(2) 
provides in relevant part:  
 
(c)  The mayor may exercise the following powers pertaining 
to emergency management:  
 
 . . . . 
 
(2) Sponsor and develop mutual aid plans and 
agreements for emergency management between  one 
or more counties, and other governmental, 
private-sector, or nonprofit organizations, for 
the furnishing or exchange of  . . . police 
services  . . . and other  . . . personnel [] and 
services as may be needed.  
   
14 Chief Ballard repeated the same arguments made before the circuit court 
for why HRS §  52D-5 does not create a private right of action.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
15 not limited by HRS §  52D-5, because the Charter of the Count y of 
Hawaiʻi (CCH) § 7-2.4(e) grants Chief Ferreira “such other 
powers, duties, and functions as may be  . . . provided by law.”  
3. Reply Brief  
Flores filed a reply brief on August 31, 2020.  In his 
reply brief, Flores rejected the Chiefs of Police ’s claim that 
HRS § 78-27 authorized  mutual aid by HPD and MPD , and insisted 
that “off island police officers” may only use their police 
powers in other counties when the requirements of HRS §  52D-5 
are satisfied.  Flores argued that, pursuant to HRS §  78-27(b), 
employees on a temporary assignment are “entitled to the same 
rights and benefits as any other employee of the sending 
agency,” but that the exercise of police powers is neither a 
right nor a benefit . 
Flores insisted that HRS §  127A-12 was inapplicable 
because the Chiefs of Police  “conspired to violate HRS § 52D-5” 
before any emergency was declared on Mauna Kea.  Additionally, 
Flores argued that he satisfied the requirements of standing for 
declaratory relief, notwithstanding the fact that he himself was 
not arrested.  Finally, Flores reiterated the arguments made in 
his opening brief that HRS §  52D-5 creates a private right of 
action. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
16 4. Amicus Curiae Brief  
The International Municipal Lawyers Association, Inc. 
(the IMLA)15 filed a motion for leave to file an amic us curiae 
brief in support of the Chiefs of Police, which the ICA granted.  
The IMLA explained that mutual aid by law enforcement 
is an essential form of intergovernmental cooperation that is 
common both in Hawaiʻi16 and throughout the United States.  
According to the IMLA, mutual aid “enables jurisdictions to 
access additional resources when the need arises  . . . [and] to 
effectively utilize all available resources, coordinate 
planning, and minimize conflict in order to ensure a timely and 
efficient response .”  The IMLA noted that the sharing of 
resources within Hawaiʻi is especially important because people 
and resources are not evenly distributed throughout the state17 
                     
15  The IMLA described itself and its interest in this case as follows:  
 
The [IMLA] is a non -profit, professional organization that 
has been an advocate and resource for local government 
lawyers since 1935.  IMLA serves as an international 
clearinghouse of legal information and cooperation on 
municipal legal matters.  IMLA has a significant interest 
in the issue presented here, which is the validity of 
mutual aid agreements between and among loca l and municipal 
governments, including agreements relating to the sharing 
of law enforcement resources.  
 
16  The IMLA cited as recent examples of mutual aid in Hawaiʻi the disaster 
responses after Hurricane Iniki in 1992 and after the eruption of Kilauea in  
2018. 
 
17  One example of this uneven distribution of resources is that Honolulu 
County covers approximately 600 square miles, but has four times the number *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
17 and help from neighboring  states cannot arrive in a timely 
fashion.  
Second, the IMLA argue d that mutual aid is authorized 
by HRS §  78-27, which provides for temporary assignment of 
personnel between state agencies, and by HRS §  127A, which 
provides for rendering of mutual aid during an emergency.  The 
IMLA noted that the Legislature enacted HRS  chapter 127A to 
“ensure that the preparations of this State will be adequate” to 
address the “existing and increasing possibility of the 
occurrence of disasters or emergencies.”  Specifically, HRS 
§ 127A-12(c)(2) permits county mayors to “ ‘[s]ponsor and d evelop 
mutual aid plans and agreements for emergency management between 
one or more counties ’ for the provision of various services, 
including ‘police services ’ and ‘personnel necessary to provide 
or conduct those services. ’”  (Alteration in original.)   The 
IMLA observed that even absent specific statutory authority, 
courts in other jurisdictions have upheld intergovernmental 
agreements for mutual aid under general principles of contract 
law. 
Third, the IMLA maintained that HRS §  52D-5, Hawaiʻi’s 
hot- or fresh-pursuit statute, does not limit the ability of 
                     
of police officers as the County of Hawaiʻi, which covers more than 4,000 
square miles.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
18  municipalities to enter into law enforcement mutual aid 
agreements.  The IMLA suggested distinguishing between a mutual -
aid statute, which benefits the receiving agency, and a hot -
pursuit statute which  benefits the sending agency.   According to 
the IMLA, “one is not a substitute for the other, nor does one 
preclude the other.”  Thus, the IMLA urged the ICA to affirm the 
circuit court and send a “clear signal  . . . that mutual aid 
agreements like the one  at issue here are broadly authorized 
under HRS §  78-27.” 
5. ICA’s Published  Opinion 
The ICA published its opinion on January 27, 2021.   
Flores v. Ballard , 149 Hawaiʻi 81, 482 P.3d 544 (App. 2021).   The 
ICA affirmed  the circuit court’s judgment  on other groun ds.18  
Id. at 92, 482 P.3d at 555.  
  As relevant here , the ICA considered whether HRS 
§ 52D-5 was implicated by HPD and MPD officers assisting Chief 
Ferreira on Mauna Kea.  Id. at 88-89, 482 P.3d at 551 -52.  The 
ICA reasoned that HRS §  52D-5 applies when a sending police 
department seeks permission to exercise police authority in 
                     
18 The ICA cited Tauese v. State, Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Relations , 113 
Hawaiʻi 1, 15 n.6, 147 P.3d 785, 799 n.6 (2006), for the proposition that “the 
result will not be disturbed on the ground that the circuit court gave the 
wrong reason for its ruling.”  Flores v. Ballard, 149 Hawaiʻi 81, 88, 482 P.3d 
544, 551 (App. 2021).   The ICA noted that “[i]n our de novo review we ‘may 
affirm a grant of summary judgment on any ground appearing in the record, 
even if the circuit court did not rely on it. ’”  Id. (citation omitted).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
19 another county “ in the pursuit of any  investigation commenced 
within” the sending agency’s home county.  Id. at 89, 482 P.3d 
at 552.  But here, the ICA noted, i t was Chief Ferreira who 
requested officers from HPD and MPD “ to assist HCPD in handling  
matters on Hawaiʻi Island that strained HCPD ’s resources .”  Id.  
According to the ICA, “[n]either Chief Ballard nor Chief Faaumu 
purported to exercise  police authority  in the County of Hawaiʻi 
‘in the pursuit of any  investigation commenced within ’ the City 
and County of Honolulu  or the County of Maui. ”  Id. (quoting HRS 
§ 52D-5).  Thus, the ICA concluded that  HRS § 52D-5 was neither 
implicated nor violated19 and “[i]t was thus appropriate for the 
circuit court to dismiss Flores ’s complaint based upon the 
alleged violation of HRS §  52D-5 by the Chiefs of Police .”  Id. 
  Second, the ICA considered whether there was other 
statutory authority for HPD and MPD to support HCPD ’s 
TMT-related operations.   Id. at 89-91, 482 P.3d at 552 -54.  
Specifically, the ICA considered whether the Inter-Departmental 
Agreements were authorized by HRS §  78-27, as Chief Ballard 
argued.  Id.  The ICA pointed out that  HRS § 78-27(d) provides 
parameters for the type of agreement : 
     An agreement consistent with this section  and policies 
of the employer shall be made between the sending and 
receiving agencies  on matters relating to the assignment or 
                     
19 The ICA did not reach the issue of whether HRS §  52D-5 creates a 
private right of action because it concluded that the statute was not 
violated.  Id. at 89, 482 P.3d at 552.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
20 exchange, including but not limited to supervision of 
duties, costs of salary and benefits, and travel and 
transportation expenses ; provided that the agreement shall 
not diminish any rights or benefits to which an employee of 
a governmental unit of this State is entitled under this 
section.  
 
Id. at 90, 482 P.3d at 553.   The ICA noted that HRS §  78-27 
contemplates that county police departments could be both 
“sending” and “receiving” agencies, because “Act 253 of the 2000 
legislative session, which resulted in the enactment of HRS 
§ 78-27, mentions ‘p olice’ three times.”20  Id.  The ICA reasoned 
that HRS § 78-27 “protects the temporarily assigned police 
officers’ civil service, collective bargaining, workers’ 
compensation, and other employment rights and benefits during 
the temporary assignment.”21  Id.  Thus, the ICA concluded that 
                     
20 The ICA pointed out that “[s]ection 74 refers to workers compensation 
benefits for police  officers.  Section 96 refers to a collective bargaining 
unit for police  officers.  Section 100 refers to resolution of labor 
grievances involving the  police officers’ collective bargaining unit.  2000 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 253.”  Id. at 90 n.8, 482 P.3d at 553 n.8.  
 
21 The ICA also noted that the Inter -Departmental Agreements contained the 
following provisions consistent with HRS §  78-27(d): 
 
 3. It is the understanding of the parties that the  
State Attorn ey General’s Office has agreed to pay for 
and/or reimburse the Sending Agency for the costs, any 
portion of the costs, overtime, benefits, and travel and 
transportation expenses on behalf of the Receiving Agency.  
However, HCPD shall ultimately be responsi ble for said 
costs and expenses should the State Attorney General’s 
Office fail to pay for and/or reimburse the Sending Agency 
for any expenditures related to the TMT Project and any 
other assignment as deemed necessary by the HCPD Chief of 
Police or his d esignee with the approval of [HPD/MPD].  
Such expenses may be paid for or reimbursed to the 
[HPD/MPD].  
 
 4. The [HPD/MPD] personnel are to carry out and  
observe all lawful instructions and orders issued by the  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
21 HRS § 78-27 authorized the Inter -Departmental Agreements  for the 
temporary assignment of HPD and MPD officers to support HCPD.  
Id. at 91, 482 P.3d at 554.   
  Third, the ICA considered whether HPD and MPD officers 
were authorized to exercise police powers within the County of 
Hawaiʻi — which was the conduct specifically challenged by Flores 
in his lawsuit.  Id. at 91-92, 482 P.3d at 554 -55.  The 
Delegations signed by  Chief Ferreira and attached to each of the 
Inter-Departmental Agreement s state: 
Under the authority of the Chief of Police, of Hawaiʻi 
County Police Department, the following officers of the  
[HPD/MPD] (please see attached list), are granted full  
police officer power, privilege and authority, under HRS 
[§] 52D-5.  The purpose of this delegation of authority, 
while assigned to Hawaiʻi [C]ounty will be to support and 
manage police operations in conjunction with the Thirty 
Meter Telescope project and any other assignment as deemed  
necessary by the Hawaiʻi County Police Chief or his  
designee.   This delegation of Police authority shall be  
effective from July 16, 2019 until the end of police  
                     
appointing authority or designee relative to e mployment.  
 
 5. The [HPD/MPD] personnel shall perform all of 
the work under the supervision of an immediate supervisor 
in the Sending Agency or any other person in the Receiving 
Agency who has the authority to supervise the activities.  
 
 . . . . 
 
 9. This employment will be subject to all laws,  
ordinances, and rules and regulations having the effect of  
law governing employment of public employees; and  
 
 10. Any and all collective bargaining agreements  
pertinent to [HPD/MPD] personnel ’s regular positions wit h 
the [HPD/MPD] shall apply, including but not limited to  
salary. 
Id. at 90-91, 482 P.3d at 553 -54. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
22 operations for this project as deemed necessary by the  
Hawaiʻi County Chief of Police.  
Id. at 91, 482 P.3d at 554   (emphasis added).   The ICA described 
the Delegations’ citation to HRS §  52D-5 as “inapt,” because 
that statute “does not apply to the circumstances described by 
the Delegations.”  Id.  
  However, the ICA surmised that Chief Ferreira was 
authorized to delegate police powers to HPD and MPD officers by  
other statutes:  HRS §§ 52D-3,22 52D-6,23 and Article VII, Chapter 
224 of the CCH (CCH Article VII ).  Id. at 91-92, 482 P.3d at 554 -
                     
22 HRS § 52D-3 (2012) provides: “The chief of police shall have the powers 
and duties as prescribed by law, the respective county charter, and as 
provided by  this chapter.”  
 
23 HRS § 52D-6 (2012) provides: “ The chief of police may appoint officers  
and other employees under such rules and at such salaries as are authorized 
by law. Probationary appointment, suspension, and dismissal of officers and 
employees of the police department shall be as authorized by law.”  (Emphasis 
added.) 
 
24 Article VII, Chapter 2 of the CCH (2018) provides, in relevant part:  
 
Section 7 -2.1. Organization.  
 
 There shall be a police department consisting of a  
police commission, a chief of police, a deputy chief of  
police, and the necessary staff.  
 
 . . . . 
 
Section 7- 2.4. Powers, Duties, and Functions of the Chief  
of Police.  
 
 The chief of police shall be the administrative head  
of the police department and shall:  
 
(a) Be responsible for the preservation of the 
public peace, prevention of crime, detection 
and arrest of offenders against the law, 
protection of the rights of persons and 
property, and enforcement and prevention of 
violations of all laws of the state and *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
23 55.  Specifically,  the ICA reas oned that  (1) HRS § 52D-3 grants 
each chief of police “ the powers and duties as  prescribed by 
law, the respective county charter, and as  provided by this 
chapter[;]” (2)  CCH Article VII  § 7-2.4(b) empowers the chief of 
HCPD to “ [t]rain, equip, maintain, and supervise the force  of 
police officers [;]” and (3)  HRS § 52D-6 allows the chief of 
police to “appoint officers  . . . under such rules  . . . as are 
authorized by law.”  Id.   
  The ICA described the relationship between HRS §  78-27 
and the statutes  authorizing Chief Ferreira’s delegation of 
authority as follows:  
HRS § 78-27 is a law that authorizes Chief Ferreira 
to temporarily receive police officers from another 
county’s police  department to support HCPD operations on 
Hawaiʻi Island.  HRS § 78-27 also authorizes Chief Ballard 
and Chief Faaumu to temporarily assign police officers from 
their respective departments to another county ’s police 
department.  The Hawaiʻi County Charter and HRS Chapter 52D 
authorize Chief Ferreira to appoint and supervise polic e 
officers in the County of  Hawaiʻi, including those 
temporarily assigned to Hawaiʻi Island from Honolulu and 
Maui counties.  
                     
ordinances of the coun ty and all regulations 
made in accordance therewith.  
 
(b)  Train, equip, maintain, and supervise the force 
of police officers  and employees.  
 
. . . . 
 
(e) Have such other powers, duties, and functions 
as may be required by the police commission or 
provided  by law. 
(Emphasis added.)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
24 Id. at 92, 482 P.3d at 555.   Thus, the ICA held that “[a] pplying 
the plain language of HRS §§  52D-3, 52D-6, and 78 -27, and 
Chapter 2 of the Hawaiʻi County Charter, in  pari materia . . . 
execution and performance of the  Agreements and the Delegations 
by the Chiefs of Police in this  case was authorized by law .”  
Id. 
  Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s 
November 12, 2019 Order Granting M otion to Dismiss  and Judgment 
in favor of the Chiefs of Police.  Id.  The ICA entered its 
corresponding Judgment on Appeal on February 24, 2021.   Flores 
filed an application for writ of certiorari  on April 22, 2021 .   
II. STANDARD S OF REVIEW  
A. Motion to Dismiss  
A circuit court order granting a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo.  Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen , 
139 Hawaiʻi 394, 401, 391 P.3d 1, 8 (2017).  “A complaint 
should not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless 
it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set 
of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle 
him or her to relief.”  In re Estate of Rogers , 103 Hawaiʻi 
275, 280, 81 P.3d 1190, 1195 (2003) (quoting Blair v. Ing , 
95 Hawaiʻi 247, 252, 21 P.3d 452, 457 (2001)).  Our review 
is “strictly limited to the allegations of the complaint,” 
which we view in the light most favorable to the plaintiff 
and deem to be true.  Id. at 280-81, 81 P.3d at 1195 -96. 
(quoting Blair, 95 Hawaiʻi at 252, 21 P.3d at 457).  
However, “the court is not required to accept conclusory 
allegations on the legal effect of the events alleged.”  
Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻi at 401, 391 P.3d at 8.  
Civ. Beat Law Ctr. for the Pub. Int ., Inc. v. City & C nty. of 
Honolulu , 144 Hawaiʻi 466, 474, 445 P.3d 47, 55 (2019).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
25 B. Summary Judgment  
If, on a motion asserting the defense number ed (6) to 
dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon 
which relief can be granted, matters outside the pleadings 
are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion 
shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed 
of as provided in Rule 56, and all parties shall be given 
reasonabl e opportunity to present all material made 
pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.  
HRCP Rule 12(b).  
The appellate court reviews “the circuit court’s grant 
or denial of summary judgment de novo.”  Querubin v. Thronas , 
107 Hawaiʻi 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2 005).  “Summary judgment 
is appropriate ‘if the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of 
material fact and the moving party is entitled to a jud gment as 
a matter of law.’”  Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co. , 
74 Haw. 85, 104, 839 P.2d 10, 22 (1992) ( citing HRCP Rule 56(c) 
(1990)) (citation omitted).  
C. Statutory Interpretation  
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions 
of law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.”  
Nakamoto v. Kawauchi , 142 Hawaiʻi 259, 268, 418 P.3d 600, 609 
(2018). 
III.  DISCUSSION  
On certiorari, Flores argues that the ICA erred by 
(1) ignoring the plain language of HRS §  52D-5 and relying on *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
26 HRS §§ 52D-3, 52D-5, 78-27, and CCH Article VII  to “effectively 
render[] HRS §  52D-5 meaningless” ; (2) holding that HRS §  52D-5 
did not apply to the facts alleged in Flores’s complaint, 
despite the fact that the Delegations cited as authority HRS 
§ 52D-5; (3) concluding that HPD and MPD officers were properly 
deputized and acting under the authority of HCPD ; and 
(4) failing to address whether Flore s had a private right of 
action to challenge the violation of HR S § 52D-5.  For the 
following reasons,  Flores’s arguments lack merit.  
A. There is no private right of action under HRS § 52D-5. 
The circuit correctly determined that, based on the 
legislative his tory and purpose of HRS §  52D-5, there is no 
private right of action under that statute .  Here, Flores’s 
complaint and the Chiefs of Police’s M otion to Dismiss  were 
filed pursuant to HRS § 52D-5, which states: 
Powers of chief of police outside own county.   The chief of 
police of each county and any duly authorized subordinates 
shall have and may exercise all powers, privileges, and 
authority necessary to enforce the laws of the State, in a 
county other than the county in and for which the chief has 
been appointed, if:  
(1) The exercise of such power, privilege, and 
authority is required in the pursuit of any 
investigation commenced within the county in and 
for which the chief has been appointed; and  
(2) The concurrence of the chief of police of the 
county in which t he power, privilege, and authority 
sought to be exercised is obtained.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
27 In his Opposition , Flores contended  that declaratory 
relief was available under HRS §  632-125 to determine (1) whether 
HRS § 52D-5 was applicable; and (2) if HRS §  52D-5 was 
applicable, whether the Chiefs of Police violated HRS §  52D-5.  
However, Flores cannot bring an action under HRS §  632-1 for 
                     
25  HRS § 632-1 (2016) provides:  
 
Jurisdiction; controversies subject to.   (a) In cases 
of actual controversy, courts of record, within the scope 
of their respective jurisdictions, shall have power to make 
binding adjudications of  right, whether or not 
consequential relief is, or at the time could be, claimed, 
and no action or proceeding shall be open to objection on 
the ground that a judgment or order merely declaratory of 
right is prayed for; provided that declaratory relief may 
not be obtained in any district court, or in any 
controversy with respect to taxes, or in any case where a 
divorce or annulment of marriage is sought.  Controversies 
involving the interpretation of deeds, wills, other 
instruments of writing, statutes, muni cipal ordinances, and 
other governmental regulations may be so determined, and 
this enumeration does not exclude other instances of actual 
antagonistic assertion and denial of right.  
(b) Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in 
civil cases where an  actual controversy exists between 
contending parties, or where the court is satisfied that 
antagonistic claims are present between the parties 
involved which indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, 
or where in any such case the court is satisfied tha t a 
party asserts a legal relation, status, right, or privilege 
in which the party has a concrete interest and that there 
is a challenge or denial of the asserted relation, status, 
right, or privilege by an adversary party who also has or 
asserts a concret e interest therein, and the court is 
satisfied also that a declaratory judgment will serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the 
proceeding.  Where, however, a statute provides a special 
form of remedy for a specific type of case, that statutory 
remedy shall be followed; but the mere fact that an actual 
or threatened controversy is susceptible of relief through 
a general common law remedy,  a remedy equitable in nature, 
or an extraordinary legal remedy,  whether such remedy is 
recognized or regulated by statute or not, shall not debar 
a party from the privilege of obtaining a declaratory 
judgment in any case where the other essential s to such 
relief are present.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
28 declaratory relief unless HRS §  52D-5 provides for a private 
right of action.  See Alakaʻi Na Keiki, Inc. v. Matayoshi , 127 
Hawaiʻi 263, 285, 2 77 P.3d 988, 1010 (2012) (citing Cnty. of Haw. 
v. Ala Loop Homeowners , 123 Hawaiʻi 391, 407 n.20, 235 P.3d 1103, 
1119 n.20 (2010)) (“In order for a party to sue for enforcement 
under HRS §  632-1, HRS chapter 103F must provide for an express 
or implied priv ate right of action.”).   Thus, we must determine 
whether HRS § 52D-5 creates a private right of action.  
This court has noted that “[r]equirements imposed by 
statutes do not necessarily give rise to a private right of 
action.”  Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻi at 405, 391 P.3d at 12 (citing 
Cannon v. Univ . of Chi., 441 U.S. 677, 688 (1979)).   This court 
has stated:  
In determining whether a private remedy is implicit in a 
statute not expressly providing one, several factors are 
relevant.  First, is the plaintiff on e of the class for 
whose [e]special benefit the statute was 
enacted;  . . . that is, does the statute create 
a . . . right in favor of the plaintiff?  Second, is there 
any indication of legislative intent, explicit or implicit, 
either to create such a remed y or to deny one?  . . . Third, 
is it consistent with the underlying purposes of the 
legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the 
plaintiff?  
Whitey’s Boat Cruises , 110 Hawaiʻi at 312, 132 P.3d at 1223 
(quoting Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd. v. Cole , 59 Haw. 503, 
507, 584 P.2d 107, 109 (1978)) ( alterations  in original) .  
Furthermore, “[w]hile each factor is relevant, ‘the key factor’ 
is whether the legislature ‘intended to provide the plaintiff *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
29 with a private right of action. ’”  Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻi at 406, 
391 P.3d at 13 (quoting Whitey’s Boat Cruises , 110 Hawaiʻi at 313 
n.20, 132 P.3d at 1224 n.20) . 
1. Flores is not part of the class for whose especial 
benefit the statute was enacted . 
As the Chiefs of Police pointed out in t heir Motion to 
Dismiss, the legislative history of HRS §  52D-5 demonstrates 
that the statute was not enacted to allow a private citizen to 
bring a claim for a violation of the statute.    
The 1971 House Journal Standing Committee Report 
provides that : 
The purpose of this bill is to add a new section to 
Chapter 52, Hawaii Revised States  [sic], which would 
provide continuity to police investigations from one county 
jurisdiction to another.  The bill allows enforcement 
powers to police chiefs outside their own county if it is 
required in pursuit of an investigation which commenced in 
their county and also if the concurrence of the chief in 
whose county the power is sought to be exercised is first 
obtained.  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703 , in 1971 House Journal, at 990 . 
  The Joint Select  Committee of Kauaʻi, Maui, Oʻahu, and 
Hawaiʻi Representatives  noted that:  
 The purpose of this bill is to add a new section to 
provide continuity to police investigations from one 
jurisdictional region to another.  
 
. . . . 
 
 This new section will continue to protect local 
control and assure cooperation through the provisions of 
notification to a county chief of police when 
investigations are to be pursued within his jurisdiction. 
The provisions for crossing county lines is con tingent upon 
the fact the investigation must commence in the home county *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
30 of the investigator.  It also assures protection of local 
jurisdictions from encroachment by outside investigators.  
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 608, in 1971 House Journal, at 947 -48. 
  The purpose of enacting HRS §  52D-5 was therefore to 
“provide continuity to police investigations from one county 
jurisdiction to another.”  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 
House Journal, at 990 .  The legislative history of HRS §  52D-5 
does not contem plate a private citizen bringing a claim against 
the Chiefs of Police for a violation of the statute.   See H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 House Journal, at 990 .  
Instead,  the legislative history discusses “enforcement powers” 
of the police chiefs outside of their own jurisdiction s.  H. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 House Journal, at 990.  Thus, 
the police chiefs, and not a private citizen  such as Flores , are 
part of t he class  for whose especial benefit HRS §  52D-5 was 
enacted. 
2. There is no indication of legislative intent to create 
or deny a private right of action.  
The legislative history  and text  of HRS §  52D-5 do not 
indicate any explicit or implicit intent that the statute 
provides for a private right of action.  A private right of 
action is not mentioned anywhere in the legislative history  or 
text of HRS §  52D-5.  See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 
House Journal, at 990 ; see also  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 608,  in 
1971 House Journal, at 947 -48; HRS § 52D-5.  Thus, there is no  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
31 indication of an  explicit intent to create a private right of 
action under HRS §  52D-5. 
Furthermore , there is no indication of an implicit 
intent to create a private right of action.   HRS § 52D-5 and its 
legislative history are silent regarding whether the statute was 
intended to create a private right of action.  See HRS § 52D -5; 
see also H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 House Journal, at 
990.  Although “legislative silence alone is not dispositive,” 
strong evidence is necessary to imply a private right of action.  
Hungate, 139 Hawaiʻi at 406, 391 P.3d at 13 (citing 1A C.J.S. 
Action §  62 (2016)).  Flores has not shown strong evidence that  
the Legislature  intended to create a private right of action in 
HRS § 52D-5.26  Therefore , because there does not appear to be an  
implicit intent to create a private right of action under HRS 
§ 52D-5, we decline to infer a private right of action under 
that statut e.  See Hungate, 139 Hawaii at 406, 391 P.3d at 13 
(quoting Touche Ross & Co v. Redington , 442 U.S. 560, 571 
(1979)) (“[I]mplying a private right of action on the basis of 
[legislative] silence is a hazardous enterprise, at best.”  
(alterations in original) ). 
                     
26  Flores contended that “by prohibiting the unauthorized and unlawful 
exercise of police powers outside an officer’s jurisdiction, [HRS §]  52D-5 
implicitly created a private right of action to seek declaratory relief.”  
Additionally, Flores argued that “[i]f the legislature in fact intended to 
preclude judicial review, then tha t preclusion violates  the separation of 
powers doctrine.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
32 3. It is inconsistent with the underlying purposes of the 
legislative scheme to imply a private right of action.  
As discussed above, the purpose of HRS §  52D-5 is to 
“provide continuity to police investigations from one county 
jurisdiction to another.”   H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 703, in 1971 
House Journal, at 990 ; see also  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 608, in 
1971 House Journal, at 947 -48; HRS §  52D-5.  In other words, the 
Chiefs of Police correctly pointed out in their Motion to 
Dismiss that “[t]he underlyin g purpose of [HRS] §  52D-5 is to 
ensure cooperative, mutual aid and assistance between the 
counties’ chiefs of police to conduct investigations in each 
other’s respective jurisdictions.”  Implying a private right of 
action under HRS §  52D-5 would be incons istent with the 
statute’s legislative scheme  because allowing a private 
individual to sue police chiefs would interfere with the ability 
of police from different jurisdictions to cooperate  and provide 
continuity to police investigations .  Thus, implying a private 
right of action would not be consistent with the underlying 
purposes of HRS §  52D-5. 
Flores filed his complaint  seeking declaratory relief  
pursuant to HRS §  52D-5.  However,  the legislative history of 
HRS § 52D-5 demonstrates  that the statute does not provide 
Flores with a private right of action.  In turn,  the circuit 
court properly granted the Chiefs of Police’s M otion to Dismiss  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
33 because Flores was not entitled to declaratory relief under 
HRS § 632-1. 
B. The ICA correctly determined that mutual aid i s permitted.  
Although the ICA could have affirmed the circuit 
court’s Order Granting M otion to Dismiss  because HRS §  52D-5 
does not create a private right of action, the ICA correctly 
determined that mutual aid between different counties is 
permitted.  According to Flores,  a police officer may only 
exercise police powers in another county when both prongs of HRS 
§ 52D-5 are satisfied, meaning that (1)  the officer is pursuing 
an investigation originating in the “sending” jurisdiction and 
(2) the chief of police of the “receiving” jurisdiction 
consents.  
However, nothing in the plain language of HRS §  52D-5 
indicates that the statute identifies  the only scenario in which 
a police officer may exercise police authority in another 
jurisdiction .  Rather, HRS §  52D-5 describes a specific scenario 
in which it is permissible for a chief of police or an 
authorized subordinate to exercise the authority of the sending 
county in another county.   See HRS § 52D-5. 
In addition , Flores’s interpretation ignores the 
practical  need for mutual aid – a necessity that the Legislature 
recognized and provided for in other statutes.  See HRS § 78-27 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
34 (providing for the temporary inter -governmental assignment of 
employees by agreement); HRS §  127A-1227 (vesting county mayors 
with author ity to “develop mutual aid plans and agreements for 
emergency management” between counties for the provision of 
necessary services, including police services).   Furthermore , as 
the IMLA point ed out, mutual aid is an important tool to enable 
state agencies “to access additional resources when the need 
arises[]” and helps facilitate a timely response to emergencies.  
Thus, Flores’s interpretation that HRS §  52D-5 limits all out-
of-county police action and mutual aid is without merit , and the 
ICA correctly det ermined that mutual aid between police officers 
of different counties is permitted under Hawaiʻi law. 
IV. CONCLUSION  
The legislative history of HRS §  52D-5, which was the 
basis of Flores’s complaint, demonstrates that the statute does 
not provide for a private  right of action.  Thus, the circuit 
court properly dismissed Flores’s complaint.   In addition,  as 
held by the ICA,  mutual aid between police departments  of 
different counties is permitted under Hawaiʻi law.   
                     
27  The Legislature described the policy and purpose of Chapter 127A 
Emergency Management as: “It is the intent of the legislature to provide for 
and confer comprehensive powers for the purposes stat ed herein.  This chapter 
shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes[.]”  HRS §  127A-1(c) 
(Supp. 2019).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
35 Accordingly, we affirm the ICA’s February 24, 2021 
Judgment on Appeal, which affirmed the circuit court’s 
November  12, 2019  Order Granting M otion to Dismiss . 
 
Peter S.R. Olson 
for petitioner E. Kalani Flores 
 
Robert M. Kohn 
(Ernest H. Nomura and  
Nicolette Winter with him 
on the briefs) for  
respondent Arthur Logan i n his 
capacity as Chief of Police of 
the City and County 
of Honolulu  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 
Peter A. Hanano  
for respondent John Pelletier
in his capacity as Chief of 
Police of Maui County
  
 
Lerisa L. Heroldt  
(Laureen L. Martin with her 
on the briefs) for respondent 
Paul Ferreira in his c apacity as
the Chief of Police of the 
County of Hawaiʻi   
 
Alan D. Cohn* (Richard F. 
Nakamura, Steven L. Goto and 
Jason E. Meade*, with him on the 
briefs) for amicus curiae 
International Municipal Lawyers 
Association, Inc. 
 
Kimberly T. Guidry and 
Kalikoʻonālani D. Fernandes  
for amicus curiae State of 
Hawaiʻi 
 
*admitted pro hac vice   
 
