   
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000807 30-APR-2020 10:08 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I
 
---o0o---
HAWAIIUSA FEDERAL CREDIT UNION, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
JONNAVEN JO MONALIM; MISTY MARIE MONALIM,
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellants,  
 
and  
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF BEACH VILLAS AT KO OLINA,  
by its Board of Directors; KO OLINA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, INC.,
a Hawai ‘i  nonprofit corporation;  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
SCWC-16-0000807  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP -16-0000807; CIV. NO. 10-1-1388)  
 
APRIL 30, 2020  
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J  ., CONCURRING
AND DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS   
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK,  J.   
The law has long permitted a borrower, or mortgagor, 
to pledge real property to a lender, or mortgagee, as security  
 
 2 
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
    
   
  
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
for a loan. In the event of a default, the mortgagee may sell 
the property to generate funds that will go toward paying what 
is owed. In some instances, however, the proceeds of the sale 
are insufficient to pay what is due under the mortgage, and the 
mortgagee is entitled to a deficiency judgment holding the 
mortgagor liable for the remaining balance. 
Such a deficiency occurred in this case.  The 
mortgagors defaulted on the loans
, the property was sold, and 
the foreclosure sale price was less than the amount due on the mortgage. Thereafter, the mortgagee waited over four years, 
without explanation, before attempting to collect a deficiency 
judgment.  The mortgagors contend that this delay was unreasonable and prejudiced them because they had begun to 
rebuild their lives in the years since the sale, and the 
mortgagee should therefore be barred from now seeking a deficiency judgment by the doctrine of laches.  They also argue 
that, because the circumstances of a foreclosure auction are 
likely to result in the sale of the property for less than its 
fair market value, the process by which 
Hawai‘i  courts calculate 
a deficiency judgment is unfair.  They ask that we instead adopt 
the approach favored by a majority of other jurisdictions and 
the Restatement (Third) of Property, in which the greater of the fair market value as of the date of the foreclosure sale or the  
 
 3 
     
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
sale price of the property is deducted from the money owed when 
calculating the deficiency. 
On review, we hold that the mortgagors’ challenge to 
the deficiency judgment is not barred by res judicata and that the circuit court erred by failing to rule on their laches 
defense.  We also hold that, because the traditional approach 
can result in unjust enrichment and the majority rule protects all parties to the mortgage, the equities weigh in favor of adopting the method of calculating a deficiency judgment 
employed by a majority of other jurisdictions.  However, our 
adoption of the majority rule is prospective in effect and applies only to foreclosure cases in which a deficiency judgment is entered after the date of this opinion. 
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. Background 
In 2008, Jonnaven Jo Monalim and Misty Marie Monalim 
(the Monalims) received two loans from HawaiiUSA Federal Credit 
Union (HawaiiUSA) to purchase a property located in Kapolei, 
Hawai‘i  (the Property). The Property was a three bedroom, three 
bathroom unit of the Beach Villas at Ko Olina Condominium built 
in 2008. The first loan (Note 1) was for $ 911,200.00
; the 
second loan (Note 2) was for $113,900.00. Each loan was secured by a mortgage on the Property to HawaiiUSA.  
 
 4 
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
                     
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On June 24, 2010, HawaiiUSA filed a complaint in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) against the 
Monalims,1 alleging that the Monalims had defaulted on the notes 
and seeking to foreclose on the mortgages.  Thereafter, 
HawaiiUSA filed a motion for summary judgment, which the circuit 
court granted on August 29, 2011 (Foreclosure Order).  The 
circuit court found that the Monalims owed $1,024,428.04 on Note 1 and $121,547.20 on Note 2 and that HawaiiUSA was entitled to foreclose upon the mortgages securing the notes. On the same 
day, the circuit court entered its judgment on the Foreclosure Order (Foreclosure Judgment). 
In the Foreclosure Order, the circuit court appointed 
a commissioner to take possession of the P
roperty and oversee 
its sale, subject to confirmation by the court. HawaiiUSA was 
allowed under the Foreclosure Order to request a deficiency judgment in the event that the proceeds recovered from the 
Property’s auction were insufficient to cover the Monalims’ 
outstanding debt on the notes: 
At the hearing for confirmation of sale, if it appears that 
the proceeds of the sale of the Mortgaged Property are
insufficient to pay all amounts due and owing to
[HawaiiUSA], [HawaiiUSA] may request a deficiency judgmentin its favor and against the [Monalims] for the amount of the deficiency which shall be determined at the time ofconfirmation and have immediate execution thereafter. 
1 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.  
 
 5 
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
     
 
    
   
  
  
   
 
                     
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The Monalims filed an appeal of the Foreclosure Order 
and Foreclosure Judgment to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA) on September 28, 2011.  The appeal was dismissed on 
September 20, 2012, for failure to submit an opening brief. 
The Property was auctioned at public sale on October 
24, 2011. Prior to the sale, the Property received a 2011 tax assessment from the City and County of Honolulu in which it was valued at $703,600.00.  According to the commissioner’s report, 
only three people attended the auction and sixteen bids were 
received. T
he last bid was for $760,000.00. In the report, the 
commissioner stated that $ 760,000.00 was a fair and reasonable 
bid price based on comparable sales and recommended that the 
court confirm the sale. HawaiiUSA filed a motion to confirm the 
sale and for deficiency judgment . After a hearing, the circuit 
court entered an order granting the 
motion on December 22, 2011.  
The circuit court outlined the amounts outstanding and 
directed the commissioner to disburse the proceeds of the sale 
in order of priority.2 The court further ordered 
that since the proceeds from the sale of the Mortgaged 
Property are insufficient to fully satisfy the amounts due
to [HawaiiUSA], that a motion for deficiency judgment may 
2 The circuit court found that as of October 31, 2011, the Monalims
owed $1,080,852.79 on Note 1, which included the principal balance, interest,
accumulated late charges, and an escrow advance, and owed $127,821.36 on Note 2, which included the principal balance and interest, plus any accruing latecharges or advances up to the date of escrow closing.  The order grantingconfirmation of sale also included amounts for commissioner’s and attorneys’
fees and costs.  
 
 6 
  
  
  
  
    
   
 
 
  
    
 
 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
subsequently be filed by [HawaiiUSA] against [the 
Monalims], jointly and severally. 
The record indicates that the circuit court--based on the 
Monalims’ objection--ordered a further hearing on the matter of the deficiency judgment.   The judgment confirming the sale was 
also entered on December 22, 2011.  
B. HawaiiUSA’s Motion for Deficiency Judgment 
Over four years later, on January 12, 2016, HawaiiUSA 
filed a 
motion for deficiency j
udgment. In its motion, 
HawaiiUSA requested $355,687.07 on Note 1 and $131,755.87 on 
Note 2, which it alleged remained outstanding as of December 30, 
2011, the closing date of the sale.3 The amount outstanding on 
Note 1 was calculated by subtracting the net proceeds of the 
sale ($735,045.92) from the amount owed on Note 1 
($1,090,732.99). Because the net proceeds were insufficient to pay the full amount owed on Note 1, no sale proceeds were applied to the outstanding balance on Note 2. 
The Monalims filed a memorandum opposing HawaiiUSA’s 
motion for deficiency judgment, contending that the motion was untimely because HawaiiUSA waited “for more than an 
unprecedented four [] years” to bring the motion and that 
3 HawaiiUSA requested the following additional sums: “continuing
interest” on both notes from December 30, 2011, until “the date of entry of 
the deficiency judgment and statutory interest” thereafter on both notes;attorneys’ fees and costs for the preparation of the motion for deficiencyjudgment; and attorneys’ fees and costs related to the Monalims’ previously
dismissed ICA appeal.  
 
 7 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
   
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HawaiiUSA was therefore barred by the doctrine of laches. 
According to the Monalims, HawaiiUSA was required by the 
Foreclosure Order to request the amount of any deficiency 
immediately following the sale of confirmation, “which it [] deliberately chose [] not to do.” The Monalims averred that 
they could have filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and suffered no deficiency judgment had HawaiiUSA filed its motion in 2011.  Instead, the Monalims contended, “in reliance upon there being no deficiency judgment they [had] set out to rebuild their 
lives.” They each started a business, began saving for their 
daughter’s college tuition, and were only a few months from clearing the foreclosure from their credit reports, the Monalims stated in an appended declaration. HawaiiUSA’s unexplained 
delay in filing its motion for deficiency judgment would 
“overwhelming[ly] prejudice” them, they argued. 
The Monalims also challenged the method used for 
calculating the deficiency judgment and contended that an evidentiary hearing should be held to determine the fair market value of the 
Property at the time of the sale. According to the 
Monalims, Hawai‘i  courts currently calculate the amount of a 
deficiency judgment by “mathematically” subtracting the net 
proceeds of the sale from the mortgage debt without considering any evidence of a higher property valuation or any subsequent 
sales for higher prices. 
Hawai‘i  courts will set aside the  
 
 8 
    
   
    
 
    
  
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
                     
  
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
earlier auction price only if it is said to “shock the 
conscience of the Court,” the Monalims related. The Monalims 
contended that this “completely ignores reality and equity” because lenders have the ability to routinely “credit bid” for the property at the foreclosure auction, thereby scaring away 
competition.
4 This enables a mortgagee to recover the property 
at less than fair market value and secure a windfall, the 
Monalims asserted.  The result, the Monalims argued, is that borrowers are penalized beyond what the foreclosing mortgagee 
actually lost. 
The Monalims contended that this procedure for 
calculating deficiency judgments violates both procedural and 
substantive due p
rocess because mortgagees are constitutionally 
entitled to no more than payment in full. The Monalims 
maintained that Hawai‘i’s  method represents the minority view 
among states and that the circuit court should instead conduct a 
separate evidentiary hearing to determine the fair market value 
of the Property, which would be deducted from the mortgage debt 
4 A credit bid allows a secured lender to bid up to the amount of
debt owed to it in lieu of cash at sale. Lambert v. Teisina , 131 Hawai ‘i 457,
459 n.5, 319 P.3d 376, 378 n.5 (2014) (per curiam) (“ A ‘credit bid’ is a bid 
up to an amount equal to the unpaid principal and interest of a debt,
together with costs, fees, and other expenses, without tendering cash.”).  
 
 9 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
   
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in lieu of the sale price if it is the greater of the two.  
(Citing Sostaric v. Marshall, 766 S.E.2d 396 (W.Va. 2014).) 
In its reply, HawaiiUSA argued that its motion for 
deficiency judgment was proper because Hawai‘i  law does not 
require such a motion to be filed within a certain time from the 
date of confirmation. Further, HawaiiUSA argued, the Monalims 
did not suffer any prejudice because HawaiiUSA did not prevent 
the Monalims from filing bankruptcy or make representations that it would not seek a deficiency judgment, and the Monalims could 
still file for bankruptcy. HawaiiUSA also contended that under 
Hawai‘i  caselaw, the court may refuse to confirm the sale if the 
highest bid “is so grossly inadequate as to shock the 
conscience,” which it was not in this case.  (Quoting Wodehouse 
v.
 Hawaiian Trust Co., 32 Haw. 835, 854 (Haw. Terr. 1933).)  
HawaiiUSA maintained that third party bidders were not discouraged from bidding; HawaiiUSA did not receive a windfall; and the Monalims’ due 
process rights were not violated.  
At the hearing on the motion for deficiency judgment, 
the circuit court asked counsel for HawaiiUSA if there was any reason why it had waited four years to file the motion. Counsel 
responded that, without going into attorney-
client privileged 
information, counsel could not “comment about any particular 
client’s” propensity to seek a motion.  However, counsel contended that once a judgment is obtained it lasts for ten  
 
 10 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
years and, by analogy, the motion should be considered timely 
because it was brought within that time period. The Monalims 
responded that the analogy worked the opposite way because HawaiiUSA could wait an indefinite amount of time to seek the deficiency judgment, effectively extending the statutory period 
for collecting the judgment, which was contrary to the 
legislature’s intention to give the borrower some peace by limiting the time period of liability. HawaiiUSA replied that a 
further hearing on the deficiency judgment was ordered based on 
the Monalims’ objection at the confirmation hearing and argued 
that the foreclosure price was reasonable. 
On October 13, 2016, the circuit court entered its 
“Order Granting in 
Part and Denying in Part [HawaiiUSA’s] Motion 
for Deficiency Judgment Against [the Monalims] Filed January 12, 2016” (Order Granting Deficiency Judgment) and the “Deficiency Judgment Against the [the Monalims] and in Favor of [HawaiiUSA]” 
(Deficiency Judgment). The Order Granting Deficiency Judgment 
awarded HawaiiUSA a deficiency judgment of $493,282.04.
5 “[D]ue 
to the delay in filing” the motion, however, the circuit court 
denied HawaiiUSA’s request for interest for the period between 
the closing date of the sale and the entry of the Deficiency 
5 The amount included the deficiencies on the two loans, attorneys’
fees and costs incurred in the preparation of the motion, and attorneys’ fees 
and cost associated with the Monalims’ dismissed ICA appeal. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 
 Judgment, as well as its request for statutory interest for the 
period after the entry of the Deficiency Judgment.  The Order 
Granting Deficiency Judgment did not address the laches defense 
raised by the Monalims or their request for a hearing as to the market value of the Property.  The Monalims appealed to the ICA. 
C. ICA Proceedings 
  On appeal, the Monalims maintained that HawaiiUSA’s 
motion for deficiency judgment was barred by laches and that the circuit court should have held evidentiary hearings on prejudice 
resulting from the untimely motion and on the amount owed.  
  The ICA entered its Summary Disposition Order (SDO) on 
May 17, 2018.   The ICA held that the Monalims’ assertion that 
the deficiency judgment was required to be determined at the 
time of the confirmation of sale was without merit because the 
Monalims objected and sought a further hearing in regard to the deficiency judgment.   6
  The ICA also stated that the Monalims made no discernable argument about laches.  Nevertheless, the ICA addressed the prejudice posed by HawaiiUSA’s delay in filing the motion, concluding that the order confirming the sale of the 
Property gave the Monalims notice of the possibility of a 
deficiency judgment such that their contentions related to 
                     
 6 The ICA’s SDO can be found at HawaiiUSA Fed. Cred. Union v. 
Monalim, No. CAAP- 16-0000807, 2018 WL 2254707 (May 17, 2018).   
 
 12 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prejudice were without merit. The ICA additionally found that 
the Monalims had not requested a hearing on prejudice and held 
that the circuit court therefore did not deny their request for 
a hearing. Further, the ICA noted, the circuit court did address potential prejudice to the Monalims when it denied 
HawaiiUSA’s request for continuing interest from the closing 
date of the sale to the entry of the Deficiency Judgment and for statutory interest after the entry of the Deficiency Judgment.  The ICA also pointed to the Monalims’ failure to seek a 
dismissal under 
Hawai‘i  Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
41(b)(1) or to file a motion to bring closure to the 
proceedings. 
The ICA likewise rejected the Monalims’ contention 
that the circuit court should have held an evidentiary hearing on the amount owed. The ICA ruled that the method for calculating the deficiency was not determined by the Deficiency 
Judgment but rather the amount was incident to the enforcement 
of the Foreclosure Judgment. The ICA found that the Monalims had the opportunity to challenge how the deficiency judgment would be calculated in their first appeal, and they failed to do 
so. The ICA therefore held that the Monalims were precluded by  
 
 13 
  
    
   
 
  
         
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
 
    
  
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
res judicata from challenging the method of calculating the 
Deficiency Judgment and affirmed the circuit court.7 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Questions of Law 
“Questions of law are reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard of review.”  Roes v. FHP, Inc., 
91 Hawai‘i  
470, 473, 985 P.2d 661, 664 (1999) (quoting Francis v. Lee 
Enters., Inc., 89 Hawai‘i  234, 236, 971 P.2d 707, 709 (1999)). 
B. Courts Sitting in Equity 
The extent of the relief granted by a court in equity 
rests within the sound discretion of the circuit court and will 
not be disturbed unless the circuit court abused its discretion. 
Peak Capital Grp., LLC, v. Perez, 141 Hawai‘i  160, 172, 407 P.3d 
116, 128 (2017); Hawaii Nat’l Bank v. Cook , 
100 Hawai‘i  2, 7, 58 
P.3d 60, 66 (2002). A court abuses its discretion by “issuing a 
decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregard[ing] rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of the appellant.” Cook, 100 Hawai‘i  at 7, 
58 P.3d at 66 (quoting Shanghai Inv. Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 
Hawai‘i  482, 493, 993 P.2d 516, 526 (2000)). 
7 The Monalims further argued as points of error that the 
deficiency judgment was “contrary to the law of the case,” HawaiiUSA waived
its right to a deficiency judgment, and they were irreparably prejudicedbecause they reasonably relied on Haw aiiUSA’s waiver.  The ICA did not 
address the merits of these issues.  
 
 14 
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
C. Statutory Interpretation 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
that is reviewed de novo. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Trust Co. v. 
Greenspon, 143 Hawai‘i  237, 243, 428 P.3d 749, 755 (2018). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The Monalims’ Challenge to the Deficiency Judgment Is Not 
Barred by Res Judicata. 
The ICA held that res judicata barred the Monalims 
from challenging the method in which the 
Deficiency J
udgment was 
calculated because they failed to raise the issue in their 
appeal of the Foreclosure Judgment. It is true that the 
doctrine of res judicata prohibits parties from relitigating a 
previously adjudicated cause of action or claims that could have been brought in a previous action between the same parties but were not. Mortg. Electr. Registration Sys., Inc. v. Wise , 130 
Hawai ‘i 11, 17-18, 304 P.3d 1192, 1198-99 (2013).  However, under 
this court’s precedents, “foreclosure cases are bifurcated into 
two separately appealable parts: (1) the decree of foreclosure and the order of sale, if the order of sale is incorporated 
within the decree, and (2) all other orders.”  
Id. 
at 16, 304 
P.3d at 1197 (quoting Sec. Pac. Mortg. Corp. v. Miller
, 71 Haw. 
65, 70, 783 P.2d 855, 857 (1989)).  And the bifurcated nature of mortgage foreclosure proceedings is treated as two separate  
 
 15 
       
 
  Additionally, Hawai‘i  Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§  667
-51(a)  (Supp. 2010)  sets forth the specific orders that are 
deemed final and appealable in the foreclosure context. Section 
667-51(a)(1)  provides that an adjudication of the right to a 
deficiency judgment incorporated into a judgment on a decree of foreclosure is final and appealable. Separately, section 667-51(a)(3)
  states that an appeal may be taken from the amount  98
                     
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
proceedings for res judicata purposes. Id. at 17, 304 P.3d at 
1198.  
8 HRS § 667- 51(a)(1) provides as follows: 
(a) Without limiting the class of orders not specified in
section 641 -1 from which appeals may also be taken, the 
following orders entered in a foreclosure case shall befinal and appealable: 
(1) A judgment entered on a decree of foreclosure, andif the judgment incorporates an order of sale or an
adjudication of a movant’s right to a deficiency
judgment, or both, then the order of sale or theadjudication of liability for the deficiency judgment 
also shall be deemed final and appealable[.] 
Additionally, HRS § 667 -51(a)(2) provides that, in the event it is not 
incorporated with another order, “ [a] judgment entered on an order confirming 
the sale of the foreclosed property,” is appealable “if the circuit court expressly finds that no just reason for delay exists, and certifies the
judgment as final pursuant to rule 54(b) of the Hawaii rules of civil
procedure[.]” 
9 HRS § 667- 51(a)(3) provides that the following order entered in a 
foreclosure case shall be final and appealable: 
(3) A deficiency judgment; provided that no appeal from a
deficiency judgment shall raise issues relating to the
judgment debtor’s liability for the deficiency judgment (asopposed to the amount of the deficiency judgment), nor shall the appeal affect the finality of the transfer oftitle to the foreclosed property pursuant to the order
confirming sale.  
 
 16 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
   
 
   
   
 
     
 
                     
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of a deficiency judgment provided that the appeal does not raise 
issues related to the judgment debtor’s right to the deficiency 
judgment or affect the finality of the transfer of title of the 
foreclosed property. It is thus unsurprising that in Wise, this court held that the defendant’s “timely appeal from the 
Deficiency Judgments 
would entitle it to challenge errors unique 
to it, such as an erroneous upset price or miscalculation of 
deficiency.”10 130 Hawai‘i  at 16, 304 P.3d at 1197 (second 
emphasis added) (quoting Miller, 71 Haw. at 71, 783 P.2d at 
858
). 
The ICA misapprehended this holding in concluding that 
because the Monalims failed to challenge the method for 
calculating the deficiency in their appeal of the Foreclosure 
Judgment--which was dismissed--they were barred by res judicata 
from challenging it in an appeal of the Deficiency Judgment. In Wise, the petitioner appealed from an order confirming sale, 
challenging the respondent’s standing to bring the foreclosure 
suit “in the first place.” 
130 Hawai‘i  at 15, 17, 304 P.3d at 
1196, 1198.  We concluded that because the issue of standing 
could have been raised at any time, it was not “unique” to the 
confirmation of sale and should therefore have been challenged 
10 Although the court did not cite HRS § 667- 51(a) as a basis for 
its decision in Wise, its holding is consistent with the statute.  
 
 17 
    
 
   
  
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
  
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in an appeal from the judgment of foreclosure.  Id. at 17, 304 
P.3d at 1198.  
In contrast to the standing issue before the Wise 
court, the Monalims’ appellate challenge is to the method by which the circuit court calculated the deficiency judgment, 
which pertains to the amount of the deficiency judgment--not 
HawaiiUSA’s right to collect it “in the first place .” See 
id. 
at 15, 17, 304 P.3d at 1196, 1198. When the Monalims’ appeal of the Foreclosure Judgment was dismissed by the ICA, the Monalims 
lost the ability to contest HawaiiUSA’s right to a 
deficiency 
judgment pursuant to the Foreclosure Judgment.  However, 
pursuant to HRS § 667-51(a)(3) and this court’s precedents, the Monalims may still appeal the Deficiency Judgment as long as 
their challenge contests the calculation of the deficiency 
amount and not HawaiiUSA’s right to the deficiency judgment under the Foreclosure Judgment. The Foreclosure Judgment did 
not set out the amount or method for calculating the deficiency judgment. 
Because the Monalims were not required to contest the 
amount of the deficiency judgment in their appeal from the Foreclosure Judgment, the prior proceeding does not implicate 
res judicata.  The ICA therefore erred in concluding that the  
 
 18 
   
  
  
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
                     
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Monalims were barred from contesting the method for calculating 
the amount of the deficiency judgment.11 
B. The Circuit Court Failed To Address the Monalims’ Laches 
Argument. 
“Mortgage foreclosure is a proceeding equitable in 
nature and is thus governed by the rules of 
equity.”  Beneficial 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawai‘i  289, 312, 30 P.3d 895, 918 
(2001). An equity court’s sound discretion is not bound by 
strict rules of law, but it can be molded to do justice.  Id. 
Although laches was originally a doctrine reserved for equitable 
proceedings like the present case, this court has stated that, 
in the State of Hawai‘i , “laches is a defense in all civil 
actions.” Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Royal Aloha v. Certified 
Mgmt., Inc.
, 139 Hawai‘i  229, 235, 386 P.3d 866, 872 (2016).  
Therefore, laches is a defense against a motion for deficiency 
judgment. See BayBank Conn., N.A., v. Thumlert
, 610 A.2d 658, 
662 (Conn. 1992) (“[A] defendant who is demonstrably prejudiced by a plaintiff’s delay in filing a motion for deficiency 
judgment may invoke the equitable defense of laches.”); E. 
Banking Co. v. Robbins, 149 N.W. 779, 780 (Neb. 1914) (holding 
11 We also overrule the following ICA cases to the extent that they
held that res judicata barred the mortgagee from challenging the method in 
which the deficiency judgment was calculated: Ke Kailani Partners, LLC v. Ke 
Kailani Dev. LLC , Nos. CAAP -12-0000758 & CAAP -12-0000070, 2016 WL 2941054 
(App. Apr. 29, 2016) (mem.); LCP- Maui, LLC v. Tucker, No. CAAP- 15
-0000109, 
2018 WL 1082855 (App. Feb. 28, 2018) (SDO).  
 
 19 
  
  
   
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that “a court of equity in the exercise of its inherent power to 
deny relief on account of laches, independently of the statute 
of limitations, should refuse to enter a deficiency judgment” 
when the petitioner had waited more than 14 years). 
The doctrine of laches reflects the maxim that equity 
aids the vigilant, not those who slumber on their rights. Small 
v. Badenhop, 67 Haw. 626, 640, 701 P.2d 647, 656 (1985). There 
are two prongs of the laches defense, both of which must be 
satisfied in order for the doctrine to become applicable: 
First, there must have been a delay by the plaintiff in
bringing his claim, and that delay must have been 
unreasonable under the circumstances. Delay is reasonable
if the claim was brought without undue delay after 
plaintiff knew of the wrong or knew of facts and
circumstances sufficient to impute such knowledge to him.
Second, that delay must have resulted in prejudice to
defendant. 
Herrmann v. Herrmann, 138 Hawai‘i  144, 153, 378 P.3d 860, 869 
(2016) (quoting Adair v. Hustace
, 64 Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 
294, 300 (1982)).  
Despite ruling that the Monalims made no discernable 
argument as to a laches defense, the ICA also stated that the 
Monalims’ 
arguments as to prejudice--the second prong of laches-
-were without merit. However, a review of the record 
demonstrates that the Monalims raised substantive arguments as to both of the defense’s requirements.  
When evaluating the first prong of laches, a court 
considers whether, under the circumstances, the delay in  
 
 20 
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
   
    
  
 
 
  
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
bringing the claim was unreasonable. Id. In this case, the 
judgment confirming the sale was entered on December 22, 2011.  
More than four years later, on January 12, 2016, HawaiiUSA filed 
its motion for deficiency judgment. The Monalims argued in their opposition to HawaiiUSA’s motion that the four -
year delay 
was unprecedented, and that HawaiiUSA had provided no explanation for the delay in its submissions to the court.  And when asked directly during the hearing on the motion, counsel for HawaiiUSA declined to provide an explanation for the delay, 
citing attorney-client privilege. The Monalims’ establishment 
of a four-year delay in HawaiiUSA seeking to recover a 
deficiency amount from the Monalims and the lack of any explanation for this delay by HawaiiUSA satisfied the Monalims’ 
burden to adduce sufficient facts to raise a laches defense with 
regard to the first prong. Cf. Herrmann, 138 
Hawai‘i  at 153-54, 
378 P.3d at 869-70 (noting that the plaintiff did not proffer a 
satisfactory excuse for the almost seven-year delay in bringing 
suit); see also In re Kawai
, 36 Haw. 533, 536 (Haw. Terr. 1943) 
(observing that a party who waited nearly five years after the final order of distribution before commencing an action to 
revoke a will did not provide a “satisfactory excuse”). 
As to the second prong, 
that the delay must have 
resulted in prejudice to the defendant, we have stated, “W
hat 
qualifies as prejudice for purposes of the laches doctrine  
 
 21 
   
     
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
invariably depends on the facts and circumstances of a 
particular case, but it is ordinarily understood as anything 
that places the defendant ‘in a less favorable position.’” 
Herrmann, 138 Hawai‘i  at 154, 378 P.3d at 870 (citing 27A 
Am.Jur.2d Equity 
§ 143 (2008)). 
At the circuit court, the Monalims averred in a 
declaration that they had planned to file a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
Petition to discharge the potential deficiency judgment but had abandoned their plan “after waiting close to a year” in 
anticipation of the deficiency judgment. In the interim, the 
Monalims explained, they had each started a business, started saving for their daughter’s college tuition, and were only months from clearing the foreclosure from their credit reports. 
The Monalims argued to the circuit court that the deficiency 
judgment would “wipe out” all of their financial gains since the confirmation of sale, which would not have occurred if HawaiiUSA 
moved for a deficiency judgment in 2011. The Monalims therefore 
contended that they would be in a significantly worse position- -
and suffer significant prejudice--as a result of HawaiiUSA’s delay. 
T
he Monalims thus alleged facts concerning each prong 
of their laches defense. See Kerrigan v. Kerrigan, 642 A.2d 
1324, 1327 (D.C. App. 1994) (holding that the defendant made a 
prima facie showing sufficient to establish that injustice would  
 
 22 
   
  
  
  
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
result from the plaintiff’s unexplained eight-year delay in 
bringing suit based on evidence that the defendant’s financial 
situation had greatly changed in the interim).  The ICA in this 
case thus clearly erred in holding that the Monalims made no discernable argument as to a laches defense. Additionally, 
despite the presentation of the defense, the circuit court did 
not render findings of fact and conclusions of law or otherwise rule upon the applicability of the Monalims’ laches defense in its Order Granting Deficiency Judgment or the Deficiency 
Judgment. 
The present case is analogous to Herrmann v. Herrmann, 
in which the plaintiff brought a motion for post-decree relief 
against the defendant to recover overpaid child support approximately seven years after being notified about the 
overpayments. 
138 Hawai‘i  at 147-48, 378 P.3d at 863-64.  The 
defendant argued that the seven-year delay was unreasonable and 
that the plaintiff provided no explanation for waiting to bring 
the action for reimbursement. Id. at 148, 378 P.3d at 864. 
The 
family court denied the plaintiff’s motion, citing the seven-year delay in raising the issue and concluding that the 
plaintiff was “estopped” from pursuing the claim. Id. at 150, 
378 P.3d at 866. On appeal, the ICA determined that the family 
court’s decision was based on “estoppel by laches” and that the 
family court had not made an independent conclusion as to  
 
 23 
    
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
prejudice.  Id. at 150, 378 P.3d at 866. Applying its own 
judgment, 
the ICA held that both requirements of “estoppel by 
laches” were not present, and it accordingly vacated the family 
court’s decision.  Id. at 150-53, 378 P.3d at 866-69.  
On review, this court determined that there were three 
possible explanations for the family court’s failure to make 
findings of fact as to prejudice: 
(1) the family court did not 
apply the laches doctrine; (2) the court implicitly found that the prejudice prong had been satisfied; or (3) the family court 
failed to recognize that prejudice was a required prong for the 
application of laches. Id. at 155, 378 P.3d at 871. Because of 
the family court’s silence, we stated that it was uncertain whether the prejudice prong had been satisfied, and the case was 
remanded to the family court to render factual findings with respect to whether the defendant was prejudiced by the delay
.  
Id. 
Similarly, there are at least three possible 
explanations for the circuit court’s silence regarding the Monalims’ laches defense: (1) the circuit court implicitly concluded that laches was inapplicable because it determined 
that there was no unreasonable delay or that the Monalims 
suffered no prejudice; (2) the circuit court failed to properly apply the laches defense; or (3) the circuit court failed to 
duly consider the Monalims’ laches defense.  That is to say, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 
 based on the circuit court’s lack of findings as to the laches 
defense, we are unable to determine on review whether the 
circuit court appropriately considered this defense presented by 
the Monalims.   See 138 12Hawai‘i at 155, 378 P.3d at 871.   
  The ICA alternatively held that the circuit court 
addressed the potential prejudice to the Monalims by denying 
HawaiiUSA’s requested interest on the deficiency amount .  
However, as our holding in Herrmann illustrates, because the 
circuit court did not issue any findings with regard to 
prejudice, we cannot know whether this constituted appropriate 
consideration of the laches defense.  See Herrmann, 138 Hawai‘i 
at 155-56, 378 P.3d at 871-72.  The ICA also concluded that the Monalims were on notice of the deficiency amount such that their 
contentions related to prejudice were without merit.  Though the 
                     
 12 The concurring and dissenting opinion (dissent) agrees  with our 
conclusion that the circuit court erred by failing to address the Monalims’ 
laches argument, but it then proceeds to consider and rule on the merits of the Monalims’ claim as if it were in the position of the trial court.  Dissent at 23.  When an  appellate court discerns that a trial court has 
failed to make a finding because of an erroneous view of the law, the standard rule is that the case should be remanded to the trial court to permit that court to evaluate and render the findings that should  have been 
made in the first instance.  Pullman- Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 291 
(1982).  The only exception to this rule is when the record permits only one 
resolution of the factual issue.  Sprint/United Mgmt. Co. v. Mendelsohn, 552 
U.S. 379, 387 (2008).  Because the trial court in this case failed to rule upon the applicability of the Monalims’ laches defense and rendered no findings of facts on this defense, this court is clearly not in a position to rule as a matter of law regarding factual aspects  of the Monalims’ laches 
defense.  We accordingly decline to deviate from the basic principle of law that fact- finding should be left to the fact -finder.  See also Goo v. 
Arakawa, 132 Hawai ‘i 304, 317, 321 P.3d 655, 668 (2014) (“[A] trial court is 
better equipped than an appellate court operating at a distance to fashion 
equitable relief.”).                        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  (continued . . .) fact that the Monalims were on notice of the potential 
deficiency judgment against them in 2011 is part of the 
circumstances to be considered by the circuit court in 
evaluating the prejudice prong, it is not dispositive of the Monalims’ contention that they have been prejudiced by 
HawaiiUSA’s delay in pursuing the deficiency judgment , nor can 
we conclude that this fact was actually considered by the 
circuit court.
13 See id.; Badenshop, 67 Haw. at 640, 701 P.2d at 
657 (“Prejudice has been found . . . where changes in the value 
of the subject matter or in the defendant’s position have 
occurred[.]” (emphasis added)). 
In sum, we hold that the ICA erred in affirming the 
circuit court’s Deficiency Judgment without the circuit court 
having demonstrably addressed the Monalims’ laches defense.14 
13 The ICA also noted that the Monalims did not seek a dismissal 
order or file any motions to bring closure to the proceeding. However, under
a laches analysis, the Monalims are not required to show they actively tried to bring the proceedings to a close to demonstrate prejudice. 
14 The Monalims also argued to the ICA that the Deficiency Judgment
violated the “Law of the Case” and that HawaiiUSA waived its right to the
deficiency judgment. On certiorari review, the Monalims additionally argue
the defense of estoppel by acquiescence. The Monalims’ contentions are premised on their interpretation of the term “shall” in the provision in theForeclosure Order granting HawaiiUSA the right to a deficiency judgment.   
At the hearing for confirmation of sale, if it appears that
the proceeds of the sale of the Mortgaged Property are
insufficient to pay all amounts due and owing to[HawaiiUSA], [HawaiiUSA] may request a deficiency judgment in its favor and against the [Monalims] for the amount ofthe deficiency which shall be determined at the time of 
confirmation and have immediate execution thereafter. 
25  
 
 26 
  
  
 
   
   
 
     
 
   
 
 
   
                                                                               
 
 
 
   
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
And thus, the Order Granting Deficiency Judgment and the 
Deficiency Judgment must be vacated, and on remand the circuit 
court shall consider and render a determination on the Monalims’ 
laches defense.15 
C. The Traditional Approach to Determining a Deficiency Judgment
May Hold Mortgagors Liable for More than What Is Owed and 
Grant Mortgagees a Windfall. 
In what appears to be a matter of first impression 
before this court, we review the method by which Hawai‘i  courts 
calculate deficiency judgments. The Monalims argue that courts 
in Hawai‘i  “matter-of-factly” calculate a deficiency judgment by 
subtracting the net proceeds of the foreclosure sale from the 
mortgage debt owed without considering evidence of the 
foreclosed property’s true market value at the time of sale. 
The Monalims contend that lower courts should be instructed to hold an evidentiary hearing to determine the true value of a 
property when calculating a deficiency judgment, and that this 
(. . . continued) 
(Emphases added.) 
On its face, the term “shall” in the provision relates only to 
when the court intended to determine the amount of the deficiency judgment
should one be requested. By contrast, the order specified that HawaiiUSA
“may” request a deficiency judgment at the hearing on the confirmation of
sale--a right HawaiiUSA appears to have exercised.  We therefore hold that these arguments are without merit. 
15 In light of our disposition, we do not address the Monalims’
contention that the circuit court should have conducted a separate
evidentiary hearing on prejudice.  
 
 27 
  
 
  
 
   
   
 
 
                     
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
amount should be deducted from the mortgage debt in lieu of the 
sale price if it is the greater of the two. 
Determination of the amount of a deficiency judgment 
generally follows two approaches. Under the traditional approach, the price obtained at a foreclosure sale is the 
“conclusive measure” of the amount to be deducted from the 
outstanding mortgage debt. Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 
8.4 cmt. a. (Am. Law Inst. 1997).16 The amount of 
the deficiency judgment is thus automatically calculated by 
subtracting the foreclosure sale price from the outstanding 
mortgage debt. 1 Grant S. Nelson & Dale A. Whitman, Real Estate Finance Law § 8:3 (6th ed. 2014).  A majority of jurisdictions have rejected this approach, however. “Whether by judicial 
decision or by statute, the majority view ‘afford[s] the deficiency defendant the right to insist that the greater of the fair market value
[] 17of the real estate or the foreclosure sale 
price be used in calculating the deficiency.’” Sostaric v. 
16 “At the opposite extreme, some states flatly prohibit deficiency
judgments in certain contexts.” Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages §
8.4 Reporters’ Note to cmt. a. 
17 The exact terminology used varies by jurisdiction and includes,
for example, “fair market value,” “true market value,” “actual value,” 
“reasonable value,” “fair value,” and “true value.” See Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 Reporters’ Note to cmt. a. This opinion treats
these terms interchangeably with “fair market value” and defines “fair market 
value” as “the price which would result from negotiation and mutualagreement, after ample time to find a purchaser, between a vendor who iswilling, but not compelled to sell, and a purchaser who is willing to buy,but not compelled to take a particular piece of real estate.”  Id. § 8.4
cmt. c (defining “fair market value”).  
 
 28 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Marshall, 766 S.E.2d 396, 400 (W.Va. 2014) (footnote omitted) 
(quoting Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 cmt. 
a). 
Scholars of foreclosure law have observed that the 
price obtained at a foreclosure sale is often far below the fair 
market value of the property as a result of the forced nature of 
a foreclosure sale. Robert M. Washburn, 
The Judicial and 
Legislative Response to Price Inadequacy in Mortgage Foreclosure Sales, 53 S. Cal. L. Rev. 843, 848 (1980); Nelson & Whitman, 
supra. In times of economic depression a foreclosed property is 
likely to bring an even lower price.  Nelson & Whitman, supra. 
Measuring the deficiency judgment based on the foreclosure sale price therefore may result in a double -
loss to the deficiency 
debtor: the debtor has lost the foreclosed property , and the 
debtor has not been credited the actual value of the property against the outstanding mortgage debt. See Restatement (Third) 
of Property: Mortgages § 
8.4 cmt. a; Washburn, supra, at 850. 
Conversely, these conditions may allow a mortgagee to 
potentially recover more than the original mortgage debt owed to it. This situation occurs, for example, when a mortgagee 
purchases the property during a foreclosure sale at a price below its fair market value, obtains a deficiency judgment for the difference between the foreclosure price and the outstanding 
mortgage debt
, and then resells the property at or above its  
 
 29 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
                     
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
fair market value. Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages 
§ 8.4 cmt. a; Nelson & Whitman, supra; Washburn, supra, at 849. 
The traditional approach to calculating a deficiency judgment 
thus may produce inequity between mortgagors and mortgagees by holding a mortgagor liable for more than what is owed and 
granting mortgagees a windfall they are not due.  This has 
prompted several state legislatures since the 1930s to abandon the traditional approach and instead mandate the use of a property’s fair market value as the minimum measure for 
determining a deficiency judgment.
18 Nelson & Whitman, supra. 
In addition to the states that have adopted the 
majority view through legislation, several state courts have 
adopted the majority view through judicial decision.  In 
Trustees of Washington-Idaho-Montana-Carpenters Employers 
Retirement Trust Fund v. Galleria Partnership, for example, the 
Supreme Court of Montana was called upon to review a 
$
1,308,193.35 deficiency judgment against the defendants, whose 
foreclosed property had been valued at $1,100,000 two years 
prior to a sheriff’s sale but was sold for $565,000. 780 P.2d 
608, 609, 611 (Mont. 1989).  The court determined that its own 
18 At least 23 states statutorily define a deficiency using the
“fair value” of the foreclosed property. See Restatement (Third) of 
Property: Mortgages § 8.4 Reporters’ Note to cmt. a; Sostaric, 766 S.E.2d at 400 n.11. Of those that have not, many prohibit deficiency judgmentsentirely or with respect to purchase money mortgages. See Restatement 
(Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 Reporters’ Note to cmt. a.  
 
 30 
  
  
 
  
    
 
  
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
statutes were silent as to the duty of the court to determine 
whether the sheriff’s sale reflected the fair market value of 
the foreclosed property. Id. at 616-17.  The court observed, 
however, that the majority of the neighboring states had 
statutes that “limited [a deficiency judgment] to the difference 
between the fair market value of the secured property at the time of the foreclosure sale, regardless of a lesser amount realized at the sale, and the outstanding debt for which the property was secured.” Id. 
at 616-17.  The Ninth Circuit had 
recognized that the purpose of two of those states’ statutes was to prevent the injustice that befalls the judgment debtor whose foreclosed property brings a price significantly less than its fair market value, the Montana court noted.  Id. at 617 (citing 
U.S. v. MacKenzie, 510 F.2d 39, 41 (9th Cir. 1975)).  In the 
exercise of its equity jurisdiction, the court deemed it proper to remand the case for determination of the property’s fair 
market value as of the time of the sheriff’s sale, which would 
t
hen be used to calculate the deficiency judgment.  Id. 
The Supreme Court of West Virginia has similarly 
adopted the majority view through judicial decision. In 
Sostaric v. Marshall
, the court noted that, while the governing 
state statute was silent as to whether the value of real 
property could be challenged at a deficiency judgment 
proceeding, the court had previously applied common law  
 
 31 
    
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
principles of equity to set aside foreclosure sales. 766 S.E.2d 
at 403. Concluding that adoption of the majority view would, 
inter alia, prevent a creditor from receiving a windfall at the 
expense of a deficiency defendant, the court overruled its previous precedent in favor of adopting the majority view.  Id. 
at 405. Thus, state supreme courts have not shied from using 
their inherent equity powers to adopt the majority view to create fairness between the parties in foreclosure proceedings . 
See also Wansley v. First Nat. Bank of Vicksburg, 566 So.2d 
1218, 1223-
25 (Miss. 1990) (holding that every aspect of the 
foreclosure sale must be “commercially reasonable”); Vantium 
Capital, Inc. v. Hobson, 137 So.3d 497, 499 (Fla. Ct. App. 2014) (utilizing the “fair market value” as the measure for awarding a 
deficiency decree); Licursi v. Sweeney, 594 A.2d 396, 398-99 
(Vt. 1991) (using the “value” of the property as the measure to 
determine whether a deficiency existed). 
In 1997, the American Law Institute also adopted the 
majority approach in the Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4. As set forth in the Restatement, the 
deficiency judgment debtor may request a determination of the 
“fair market value” of foreclosed property as of the date of the 
foreclosure sale. Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages 
§ 
8.4(c).  If the fair market value is greater than the 
foreclosure price, the deficiency judgment debtor is entitled to  
 
 32 
    
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
offset the deficiency against the fair market value. Id. 
§ 8.4(d).  Determination of a property’s fair market value is 
not automatic and must be requested by a deficiency judgment 
debtor. Id. 
§ 8.4 cmt. b. Thus, the Restatement “adopts the 
position of the substantial number of states that, by 
legislation or judicial decision,” allow for the calculation of 
the deficiency award using the greater of the fair market value or foreclosure price.  Id. § 8.4 cmt. a. 
In adopting the majority view, the Restatement’s 
approach is aimed at making the mortgagee whole while simultaneously preventing the unjust enrichment that could result from the traditional approach: 
This approach enables the mortgagee to be made whole where
the mortgaged real estate is insufficient to satisfy the
mortgage obligation, but at the same time protects against
the mortgagee purchasing the property at a deflated price,obtaining a deficiency judgment and, by reselling the real 
estate at a profit, achieving a recovery that exceeds the
obligation. 
Id. Logically, the majority rule protects a mortgagee against 
any loss that would occur from a sale of the property at less 
than its fair market value because the mortgagee retains the 
option of tendering a credit bid for the amount of the 
outstanding mortgage debt and obtaining the property without additional monetary payment if there are no greater bids. The 
dissent disagrees, arguing that “the mortgagee will still not be made whole if the outstanding mortgage debt exceeds the fair  
 
 33 
   
   
  
    
  
    
  
                     
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
market value of the property.”  Dissent at 22.  But this focus 
on cases in which the outstanding mortgage debt exceeds the fair 
market value of the property “deflects consideration of the risk 
management techniques available to lenders when the loan is made.”
19 See Sostaric, 766 S.E.2d at 404 n.17 (quoting First 
Bank v. Fischer & Frichtel, Inc., 364 S.W.3d 216, 227 n.5 (Mo. 
2012) (Teitelman, C.J., dissenting)). Further, by allowing the deficiency judgment debtor to request a determination of the fair market value, the Restatement’s approach protects the 
mortgagor from the danger of double-loss that would result from 
“a deficiency judgment that does not fairly recognize the value” 
of the foreclosed property. 
Restatement (Third) of Property: 
Mortgages § 8.4 cmt. a; see also CSA 13-101 Loop, LLC v. Loop 
101, LLC, 341 P.3d 452, 456 (Ariz. 2014) (“Restatement § 8.4 
seeks to protect against artificially increased deficiencies.”). 
19 As stated by the Sostaric court: 
A lender compensates for risk by charging an interest rate
that is set both by the financial markets and by the
lender’s assessment of the borrower’s creditworthiness. 
The lender also manages risk by appraising the fair market value of the property to ensure that the loan is adequatelysecured. Changing to a fair market value approachcertainly would lessen the lender’s chance of a large
windfall and would mean only that [the mortgagee], like the
borrower, is losing or gaining money based on fair market value of property. The risk of loss is part of the risk of
lending. 
That risk of loss should not be borne solely by
the borrower and then amplified by measuring the deficiency
by reference to the foreclosure sale price. 
Sostaric, 766 S.E.2d at 404 n.17 (quoting First Bank v. Fischer & Frichtel, 
Inc., 364 S.W.3d 216, 227 n.5 (Mo. 2012) (Teitelman, C.J., dissenting)).  
 
 34 
   Thus, section 8.4 of the Restatement provides a 
greater balance of the equities between mortgagor and mortgagee    
in the foreclosure process than the traditional approach.     
   
  	
  In Hawai‘i, HRS § 667-1.5  (Supp. 2015 )  authorizes
foreclosure by action and provides as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D. We Adopt the Majority Approach Because It Is Consistent 
with Principles of Equity and Hawai‘i Law. 
 
The circuit court may assess the amount due upon a
mortgage, whether of real or personal property, without theintervention of a jury, and shall render judgment for theamount awarded, and the foreclosure of the mortgage.
Execution may be issued on the judgment, as ordered by the 
court. 
Our interpretation of statutes is guided by the following well -
settled principles:  
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory -
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of 
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. 
State v. Castillon, 144 Hawai‘i   406, 411, 443 P.3d 98, 103 (2019)  
(quoting  Panado v. Bd. of Trs., Emps.’  Ret. Sys., 134 Hawai‘i  1, 
11, 332 P.3d 144, 154 (2014)).   Therefore, our interpretation of 
HRS § 667  -1.5 must begin with the language of the statute 
itself.  HRS § 667-1.5 plainly states that the circuit court   
“may assess the amount due upon a mortgage . . . and shall 
render judgment for the amount awarded.” By its use of the word  
 
 35 
  
    
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“may” the legislature has permitted courts to exercise discretion in assessing the amount due on a mortgage, “without 
the intervention of a jury.” HRS § 667-1.5.  Further, the 
statute confers on the court “specific authority to render a deficiency judgment, as an incident to the foreclosure.”  Bank 
of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 549, 654 P.2d 
1370, 1374 (1982) (emphasis omitted) (citing 2 Committee on Coordination of Rules and Statutes, Report of Committee on Coordination of Rules and Statutes (1971)). Under its plain 
language, Chapter 667 (governing foreclosures) does not mandate 
either the traditional or majority approach to calculating deficiency judgments. Instead, t
he legislature has left the 
determination of the amount due in a deficiency judgment and 
thereby the method for its calculation to the discretion of the 
courts.  
The Monalims contend that courts in Hawai‘i  currently 
determine a deficiency judgment by mechanically subtracting the 
price obtained at a foreclosure sale from the outstanding mortgage debt. They ask that this court follow the approach of 
the majority of states and the Restatement by requiring lower 
courts to conduct an evidentiary hearing to determine the fair 
market value of a foreclosed property when calculating a deficiency judgment. Citing 
Wodehouse v. Hawaiian Trust Co.
, 32 
Haw. 835, 854 (Haw. Terr. 1933), HawaiiUSA argues that no such  
 
 36 
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inquiry is required under Hawai‘i  law and contends that our 
caselaw requires the mortgagor to bear the burden of any loss 
unless the foreclosure price “is so grossly inadequate as to 
shock the conscience.” 
In Wodehouse, the trial court ordered the foreclosure 
and sale of property at a public auction with an upset price of 
$82,000. 
Id. at 840. After the property twice failed to receive 
any bids, the court gave the mortgagees a choice between taking 
possession of the mortgaged property as credit for $82,000 of 
the debt or postponing the sale to a later date. Id. The 
mortgagees declined both options, but the court nonetheless 
ordered the conveyance of the property to the mortgagees and credited the mortgagor $82,000 toward their outstanding debt.  
Id. 
On appeal, the Supreme Court of the Territory of 
Hawai‘i  concluded that while a court may refuse to confirm a sale 
where “the highest bid offered is so grossly inadequate as to 
shock the conscience,” the trial court could not compel the 
mortgagee to purchase the property at a price set by the court because the mortgagee had a contractual right to foreclose on 
the property. 
Id. at 85
2-54.  The court therefore set aside the 
trial court’s decree and remanded the case to the lower court 
with instructions to have the property offered at public auction under foreclosure. Id. at 854.  
 
 37 
    
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Wodehouse thus dealt with the court’s discretion with 
regard to the sale and confirmation of sale of a foreclosed 
property and not with the separate question of whether and for 
what amount a deficiency judgment is due. See Wansley, 566 
So.2d at 1224 (holding that the rule that “a foreclosure sale 
may not be set aside unless the sales price is so inadequate as 
to shock the conscience . . . . has nothing whatsoever to do with the separate and distinct question of what, if any, deficiency judgment may be allowed” (citations omitted)). 
Wodehouse is therefore not controlling with regard to the 
question presently before the court. 
“Mortgage foreclosure is a proceeding equitable in 
nature and is thus governed by the rules of equity.” Beneficial 
Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida, 96 
Hawai‘i  289, 312, 30 P.3d 895, 918 
(2001). A court sitting in equity has the power to mold its 
decrees to conserve the equities of the parties under the 
circumstances. Peak Capital Grp.
, LLC v. Perez , 141 Hawai‘i  160, 
179, 407 P.3d 116, 135 (2017). When considering the equities in 
a foreclosure case, “all of the equities must be considered” including “[t]he equities affecting the mortgagees . . . as well 
as those affecting the mortgagors.” 
Wodehouse, 32 Haw. at 842. 
The equitable discretion provided to our courts by HRS § 667-1.5 
is therefore governed by principles of equity and fairness.                       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
    
 
    
   
 
 
  (continued . . .) As observed in the commentary to the Restatement, the 
majority rule “enables the mortgagee to be made whole” and “also 
protects the mortgagor from the harsh consequences of suffering 
both the loss of the real estate and the burden of a deficiency judgment that does not fairly recognize the value of that real 
estate.” Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 
cmt. a.  By contrast, the traditional approach is susceptible to abuse, potentially permitting a mortgagee to reap an undue windfall at a mortgagor’s expense.  Id. The commentary goes on 
to note that “[t]he approach of this section is embodied in statutes in many jurisdictions, but the principles of this section are applicable whether a statute requires it or not.” Id. (emphasis added). Because the equities clearly weigh in 
favor of the majority approach, we now adopt section 8.4 of the 
Restatement (Third) of Property as 
Hawai‘i  law.  We thus hold 
that a deficiency defendant “may request . . . a determination 
of the fair market value of the real estate as of the date of 
the foreclosure sale.” Id. § 8.4(c).20 
20 Pursuant to HRS § 667- 1.5, the court may determine the fair 
market value of the property “without the intervention of a jury.”  Section 
8.4 of the Restatement (Third) of Property, which we expressly adopt, gives
guidance on how the fair market value may be calculated. Comment c to section 8.4 provides as follows: 
The determination of fair market value may appropriately utilize a variety of approaches including (1) the “marketdata” approach indicated by recent sales of comparableproperties; (2) the “income approach,” or the value which
the real estate’s net earning power will support based upon
38  
 
 39 
     
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The dissent asserts that by adopting section 8.4 of 
the Restatement (Third) of Property, which accords with the rule 
in the majority of jurisdictions and the modern trend, this 
court usurps the legislature’s role. Dissent at 10, 13, 13 n.4, 22-23. The dissent’s contention is groundless in light of the 
fact that the legislature, through HRS § 667-1.5, has expressly provided that the determination of the amount due in a deficiency judgment, and thereby the method for its calculation, is entrusted to the discretion of the courts. HRS § 667-1.5 
(“The circuit court may assess the amount due upon a mortgage 
. . . and shall render judgment for the amount awarded, and the foreclosure of the mortgage.”). By not specifying a method of 
calculation, the legislature authorized the courts to exercise 
discretion in determining how to calculate deficiency judgments.  
Nothing in the language of HRS § 667-1.5 suggests that the legislature sought to circumscribe a court’s discretion in this 
regard by precluding consideration of the fair market value of 
(. . . continued) 
a capitalization of net income; and (3) the current cost of 
reproducing the property less depreciation. 
Additionally, we adopt section 8.4’s prohibition on the advance
waiver of the right to a determination of the fair market value because “[i]f
such waiver were permitted, most mortgage forms would routinely incorporate waiver language and the impact of this section would be significantlyweakened.” Id. § 8.4 Reporters’ Note to cmt. b.  
 
 40 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
  
 
                     
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the foreclosed property.21 The dissent’s assertion reflects a 
core misunderstanding of the legal principle at the foundation 
of this opinion--the application of a statute to the facts of a 
case. It is axiomatic that it is “the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.” Marbury v. 
Madison , 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803). And accordingly, “[t]hose who 
apply the rule to particular cases, must of necessity expound and interpret that rule.” Id. 
Despite the clear language of the statute, the dissent 
claims that our interpretation of HRS § 667
-1.5 is “misguided.”  
Dissent at 18
.  Specifically, the dissent first posits that a 
court’s assessment of “the amount due upon a mortgage” under HRS § 667-1.5 is not related to the amount of a subsequent 
deficiency judgment, but instead refers to a determination of 
the amount due on the mortgage before a foreclosure sale has taken place. Dissent at 15. However, the dissent’s 
interpretation is directly contrary to longstanding precedent.  See Anderson, 3 Haw. App. at 549, 654 P.2d at 1374 
(“[HRS § 667-
1.5] does not require the determination of a sum certain before foreclosure is decreed since a deficiency judgment is rendered 
only after the sale of the mortgaged property.”) (emphases 
21 Indeed, at oral argument HawaiiUSA’s counsel acknowledged that
the circuit court could, under the right procedural circumstances, consider 
the fair market value of a foreclosed property. Oral Argument at 00:59:45 -
01:00:10, HawaiiUSA v. Monalim, (No. SCWC -16-0000807), http://oaoa.hawaii.gov
/jud/oa/19/SCOA_011119_SCWC_16_807.mp3 [https://perma.cc/TBK2 -9K9G].  
 
 41 
   Second, the dissent maintains that HRS § 667   -1.5 does 
not vest any discretion in the court  s  to determine the method by
which deficiency judgments are calculated. Particularly, the 
dissent relies on the fact that HRS § 667  -1.5 does not contain 
language that “expressly permit[s] the court to consider fair  
market value.”  Dissent at 16.   But it is this very absence of 
                     
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
added) (citing Indep. Mortg. Tr. v. Glenn Constr. Corp., 57 Haw.
554, 555 n.1, 560 P.2d 488, 489 n.1 (1977)).      22 
 
22 The dissent criticizes our citation to Anderson because, the
dissent asserts, it is a decision of the ICA that “this court has never
referenced or adopted.” Dissent at 1 5 n.5.  Respectfully, this is a 
misstatement of our jurisprudence. See Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes -
Toledo, 139 Hawai‘ i 361, 367, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254 (2017) (citing Anderson for 
the rule that a foreclosing party must prove the existence of an agreement,
the terms of the agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and the giving of the cancellation notice in order to prove
entitlement to foreclose); Bank of N.Y. Mellon v. R. Onaga, Inc., 140 
Hawai ‘i 
358, 361, 370, 400 P.3d 559, 562, 571 (2017) (affirming circuit court’s 
judgment confirming the sale of foreclosed property after the foreclosing party proved it was entitled to foreclosure under the “[
Anderson]
requirements”).
The dissent then asserts that its interpretation of HRS § 667
-1.5 
is in fact consistent with the interpretation of the statute in Anderson.  To reiterate, the dissent interprets HRS 667 -1.5’s statement that “[t]he circuit 
court may assess the amount due upon a mortgage” as referring to the 
determination of the amount due upon the mortgage before a foreclosure sale takes place. Dissent at 15.  In Anderson, the ICA rejected a foreclosure 
defendant’s contention that the decree of foreclosure, which entitled the
foreclosing party to a foreclosure sale, was invalid because it failed t o 
specify the actual amount due on the mortgage. 
The rule set out by the ICA
in Anderson, which we adopted in Reyes- Toledo, is that the foreclosing party 
need only prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a
default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and the giving of 
the cancellation notice in order to prove entitlement to foreclose.
Anderson, 3 Haw. App. at 549, 654 P.2d at 1374; Reyes- Toledo, 139 Hawai‘ i at 
367, 390 P.3d at 1254. Our law does not burden the foreclosing party with 
the obligation to prove the amount due on the mortgage before the foreclosure
sale because “a deficiency judgment is rendered only after the sale of themortgaged property.” Anderson, 3 Haw. App. at 549, 654 P.2d at 1374.  This process does not require a court to determine the amount due on the mortgage before granting a decree of foreclosure to the mortgagee.  
 
 42 
    
 
 
   
  
  
  
    
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
  
    
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
an express directive on the method of calculation that enables a 
court to exercise discretion in determining the deficiency 
judgment, including applying, or not applying, the traditional 
method that the dissent appears to favor.  
The dissent next relies upon 2012 “legislative 
history” to HRS § 667-1.5, a statute that the dissent acknowledges has essentially remained unchanged since its enactment in 1859.
23 Dissent at 16-17. Even if the legislative 
“history” cited by the dissent had been contemporaneous with the 
enactment of the 1859 version of the statute, resort to 
legislative history in this manner would only be appropriate if the word “may” in the statute were ambiguous.  Castillon, 144 
Hawai‘i  at 411, 443 P.3d at 103 (“[W]here the statutory language 
is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its 
plain and obvious meaning.” (quoting Panado, 134 Hawai‘i  at 11, 
332 P.3d at 154)). And assuming arguendo that the word “may” in 
HRS § 667-1.5 is ambiguous, reliance on a subsequent legislative 
committee report written 153 years after enactment of the 
statute underscores the criticism this approach has repeatedly garnered from the United States Supreme Court. 
United States v. 
Texas, 507 U.S. 529, 535 n.4 (1993) (“[S]ubsequent legislative 
23 The dissent describes the 2012 legislature as “the Legislature
which most recently amended HRS § 667 -1.5[.]”  Dissent at 18. We observe 
that the only changes to HRS § 667 -1.5 effected by the 2012 amendments were 
to the section number and title. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 182, § 3 at 648. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 
 history is a ‘hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an 
earlier’ Congress.” (quoting Pension Benefit Guar. Corp. v. LTV 
Corp., 496 U.S. 633, 650 (1990))); United States v. Price, 361 
U.S. 304, 313 (1960).   24
  The dissent’s accusation of usurpation and judicial 
activism is therefore without any validity in light of our statutory law vesting such discretion in the circuit court andthe equitable nature of foreclosure proceedings.    
25 
  Additionally, the dissent disagrees with our adoption 
of the Restatement’s approach because “the new rule will not . . . protect both parties to the mortgage.”  Dissent at 10.However, the dissent’s view has been overwhelmingly rejected by 
  
                     
 24 Additionally, the committee report in fact acknowledges the 
inequity of the traditional method of calculating deficiency judgments.  See 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3325, in 2012 Senate Journal, at 1075 (“Your 
Committee further notes that owner -occupants who lose their primary 
residences to foreclosure suffer harsh personal losses that leave them  
particularly susceptible in cases where the lender may pursue a deficiency judgment . . . .  As such, owner -occupants should be provided with greater 
relief from deficiency judgments.”).  As the committee report noted, the tendency of the traditional method to produce inequitable results merited further discussion.  Id.  It is not surprising that the majority rule, which 
we adopt today, is cognizant of the concern articulated in the committee 
report and provides an equitable means to calculate the deficiency judgment in such cases.   
  The dissent argues to the contrary, stating that the legislature 
“expressed concern about limiting lenders’ ability to pursue deficiency 
judgments, even in the case of a displaced owner -occupant, due to the 
prevalence of borrowers refinancing their mortgages for more than the value 
of their home.”  Dissent at 17 -18 (footnote omitted).  Respectfully, the 
dissent misconstrues the legislature’s apprehension, which pertained solely to “prohibiting” deficiency judgments, and not at all to consideration of a 
more equitable means to determine their amount.  
 
 25 Indeed, in the Missouri case that the dissent relies upon, the 
court declined to reconsider the manner in which deficiency judgments are 
calculated substantially because Missouri lacked a statutory equivalent to 
HRS § 667-1.5.  Dissent at 1 8-19; First Bank, 364 S.W.3d at 223.    
 
 44 
     
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the majority of jurisdictions, legal scholars, and the American 
Law Institute. See Washburn, supra, at 939 (“Fairness in the 
mortgage foreclosure process can be achieved only by balancing the rights of the mortgagee with the need to protect the mortgagor. The fulcrum of this balance is the market value of 
the foreclosed property.”)
; Restatement (Third) of Property: 
Mortgages § 8.4 cmt. a (adopting position of the substantial number of jurisdictions providing the deficiency defendant with the right to have “the greater of the fair market value of the 
real estate or the foreclosure sale price be used in calculating 
the deficiency”). 
The dissent also posits that our adoption of the 
majority rule “will unnecessarily burden parties to a 
foreclosure action
,” and that tasking the trial court with 
assessing the fair market value of real property is unduly burdensome because it will “require[] additional time and 
force[] all parties to incur additional costs.” Dissent at 20-
21. Despite the dissent’s speculative concerns, the experience 
of jurisdictions following the majority rule is quite the contrary: 
[W]e find no authority or data demonstrating that our 
trustee foreclosure laws would be unsettled were we to allow a trust deed grantor to challenge the value of real property at a deficiency judgment proceeding. A majority 
of states allow grantors to challenge the value of real
property at a deficiency judgment proceeding. We have found no authority suggesting that the states that followthe majority rule suffer from unsettled foreclosure laws,  
 
 45 
  
 
 
  The dissent further  contends that our adoption of the  
majority rule in this case is unwarranted because, “[t]he record    
                     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
nor have we found any data demonstrating that the banking
institutions in those states have been negatively affected
as a result of their jurisdictions adhering to the majority 
rule . 
Sostaric, 766 S.E.2d at 404   (emphases added).   Moreover, any 
administrative concerns entailed by our adoption of section 8.4 
are more than offset by the equity and fairness gained in determining a  deficiency judgment based on the fair market value
of the property, as manifestly demonstrated by the widespread  
adoption of the majority approach.
  26 
26 Further, our courts are already called upon to make financial
determinations similar to assessing the fair market value of real property in
many other contexts.  See, e.g., State v. Nelson, 140 Hawai ‘i 123, 134 n.14,
398 P.3d 712, 723 n.14 (2017) (deeds of real property used to secure a bail
bond must have a market value at least twice the amount of the bail); Gordon 
v. Gordon, 135 Hawai ‘i 340, 349, 350 P.3d 1008, 1017 (2015) (division of real
property for divorce); City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Steiner, 73 Haw. 449, 459, 
834 P.2d 1302, 1308 (1992) (tax appeals); Burgess v. Arita, 5 Haw. App. 581, 
589, 704 P.2d 930, 936 -37 (1985) (damages for breach of land sale contract).  
Parties may adduce evidence of the fair market value of the foreclosed -upon 
property in a variety of ways that do not entail significant additional
expenditure. See City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Int’l Air Serv. Co., 63 Haw. 322, 332, 628 P.2d 192, 200 (1981) (“Most courts presume an owner is familiar 
with his land and the market therefor and thus is competent to state anopinion of its value.”); State v. Kunimoto, 62 Haw. 502, 507, 617 P.2d 93, 97 (1980) (“[R]ecent sales of similar real estate are admissible as evidence in condemnation cases, either as substantive proof of value of property taken orin support of an expert’s opinion as to value.”); Krog v. Koahou, No. SCWC
-
12-0000315, 2014 WL 813038 (Feb. 28, 2014) (mem.) (hold
ing that a declaration 
of a real estate broker was properly admitted to prove the rental value ofreal property).
In response to the many authorities cited above, the dissent
criticizes our citation to International Air Services Co. because “[n]either 
the mortgagee nor the mortgagor would be a disinterested party who could
proffer an impartial opinion.”  Dissent at 21 n.9. But assessing the
credibility of interested witnesses and the weight to be given to testimonyis a core function of a trial court. 
Additionally, this critique is equally
applicable to any case in which parties retain expert witnesses.  
 
 46 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 Reporters’ Note  
to cmt. b (emphases added).  Thus, while section 8.4’s primary  
purpose is “preventing the unjust enrichment of the mortgagee . 
. . . [section 8.4] also protects the mortgagor from the harsh 
consequences of suffering both the loss of the real estate and the burden of a deficiency judgment that does not fairly recognize the value of that real estate.” Restatement (Third) 
of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 cmt. a.   This second purpose is 
served even when a third party is the purchaser because the fair  
value determination protects the mortgagor from a  deficiency 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shows that the deficiency judgment will not unjustly enrich the 
credit union.” Dissent at 11.27 In support of this contention, 
the dissent focuses on the fact that HawaiiUSA did not purchase 
the Property at the foreclosure auction. Id. The Restatement, 
however, rejects the requirement that the fair value 
determination be restricted to mortgagee purchasers. Section 
8.4 instructs that 
limiting the application of the fair value determination to
mortgagee purchasers may discourage mortgagees who contemplate obtaining deficiency judgments from taking part
in the foreclosure bidding and hence may remove a 
significant impetus to higher bidding by third parties. In 
addition, even when a third party is the purchaser, themortgagor may still suffer the unjustifiable double burden imposed by the loss of his or her real estate and an
unfairly measured deficiency judgment. Consequently, under
this section foreclosing mortgagees are subject to the fairvalue limitation on deficiency judgments irrespec tive of 
who purchases at the sale. 
27 HawaiiUSA also argues that it did not secure a windfall profit
over what was actually owed because it was not the purchaser of the Property.  
 
 47 
  
 
     
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
                     
  
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
judgment that does not fairly recognize the value of the lost 
real estate.28 
We observe that both the dissent and HawaiiUSA argue 
that the deficiency judgment awarded against the Monalims fairly 
recognizes the value of the Property because the sale price at 
the foreclosure auction exceeded the City and County’s valuation 
of the Property for purposes of tax assessment.  Dissent at 11.  The reliance by HawaiiUSA and the dissent on the tax-assessed value of the Property to demonstrate market value does not 
recognize the longstanding and “overwhelming weight of authority 
that assessed value is not competent direct evidence of value for purposes other than taxation.” C. C. Marvel, Annotation, Valuation for Taxation Purposes as Admissible to Show Value for 
Other Purposes 39 
A.L.R.2d 209 §4[a] (1955); see also Mettee v. 
Urban Renewal Agency, 518 P.2d 555, 557 (Kan. 1974) (“Although 
the assessor is required to appraise the value of the property, 
28 The dissent claims incredulity of our adoption of the majority 
rule in this case. Dissent at 10, 14, 2 2-23.  The dissent acknowledges,
however, that in instances where, for example, (1) the lender is the 
purchaser, (2) the borrower alleges that the sale terms were unconscionable, or (3) the borrower alleges that the sale was conducted fraudulently, a court 
could be required to make a fair value determination when there are
suggestions of inequity to ensure fairness to the borrower. Dissent at 20 
n.7.  But waiting for a case in which the mortgagee is unjustly enriched 
before adopting the majority rule is imprudent. Our adoption of the majorityrule shall be prospective only--as it would be in any subsequent case.  See 
infra pp. 49- 51.  It would thus result in a greater injustice if we were to 
await a case in which the mortgagee receives an undue windfall and theborrower suffers the “harsh consequences” of “a deficiency judgment that doesnot fairly recognize the value of that real estate.” Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages § 8.4 cmt a.  
 
 48 
    
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
  
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
it is an open secret that the assessment rarely approaches the 
true market value.” (quoting 5 Nichols on Eminent Domain § 22.1 
(3d ed.))). For over a century, 
courts in this country have 
recognized that tax assessments of real estate are not always 
aimed at estimating fair market value, and even when that is the 
case it is well understood that the custom of assessors is to 
assess property in comparison with the surrounding land.  Wray v. Knoxville, L.F. & J.R. Co., 82 S.W. 471, 475 (Tenn. 1904) (“This court knows judicially and as a part of the financial 
history of the State that land is never assessed for purposes of 
taxation at its real cash market value, though that may be the law, but only in comparison with other lands around it[.]”); see 
also McClure v. Delguzzi
, 767 P.2d 146, 148 (Wash. Ct. App. 
1989) (“[N]otwithstanding statutory requirements, assessor’s 
values were relative, not actual.”).29 As such, the reliance by 
the dissent and HawaiiUSA on the tax-assessed valuation of the 
Property is misguided.  In fact, examination of the facts in 
this very case disabuses one of the notion that tax assessments accurately reflect market value. The Monalims purchased the Property in 2008.  The mortgages the Monalims executed on the 
property at the time of sale were for the total amount of 
29 Assessed values may also exceed market values. See, e.g, Kuiters 
v. Cty. of Freeborn, 430 N.W.2d 461, 462 (Minn. 1988) (agricultural property 
in the county was assessed, on average, at 115% of its market value).  
 
 49 
  
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
   
   
  
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
$1,025,100. The tax-assessed value of the Property in 2008 was 
$322,600. 
In any event we need not resolve whether the 
deficiency judgment awarded against the Monalims fairly accounted for the value of the Property. Of more fundamental 
importance, there is little disagreement that the equitable 
considerations of foreclosure proceedings warrant affording the mortgagee the right to apply the fair market value of mortgaged property towards the amount due on the mortgage, as section 8.4 
provides. The majority of jurisdictions and the growing 
consensus regarding a mortgagor’s right to a fair market value determination firmly establishes that, by adopting section 8.4, we advance the fundamental fairness of foreclosure proceedings 
in 
Hawai‘i , protect mortgagors from the double burden of losing 
their land and suffering an unfairly measured deficiency 
judgment, and enable mortgagees to be made whole.  
Because our adoption of section 8.4 “announce[s] a new 
rule . . . we are free to apply this new rule with or without 
retroactivity.”30 Lewi v. State, 145 Hawai‘i  333, 349 n.21, 452 
P.3d 330, 346 n.21 (2019) (internal quotations and alterations 
omitted) (quoting State v. Jess, 117 Hawai‘i  381, 401, 184 P.3d 
30 We reject the Monalims’ contention that procedural and
substantive due process was violated in determining the amount of the
deficiency judgment in light of the circumstances of this case.  
 
 50 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
133, 153 (2008)). Regarding the retroactive effect of our 
holdings, we have adopted the following approach: 
This court has generally considered three primary 
alternatives in deciding to what degree a new rule is tohave retroactive effect. First, this court may give a newrule purely prospective effect, which means that the ruleis applied neither to the parties in the law -making 
decision nor to those others against or by whom it might beapplied to conduct or events occurring before thatdecision. Second, this court may give a new rule limitedor “pipeline” retroactive effect, under which the ruleapplies to the parties in the decision and all cases that 
are on direct review or not yet final as of the date of the
decision. Third, this court may give a new rule fullretroactive effect, under which the rule applies both tothe parties before the court and to all others by andagainst whom claims may be pressed. . . . 
In exercising our discretion in deciding the effect of anew rule, we weigh the merits and demerits of retroactiveapplication of the particular rule in light of (a) thepurpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the extent of 
reliance . 
. . on the old standards, and (c) the effect on 
the administration of justice of a retroactive application
of the new standards. 
Id.  (internal citations and quotations omitted).   Here, we adopt
the majority approach to calculating deficiency judgments in  
order to properly balance the equities between mortgagors and 
mortgagees, protect mortgagors  from double-loss by not fairly 
recognizing the value of the foreclosed property, and prevent   
undue windfalls at mortgagors’ expense.  However, parties have 
relied on the finality of the many deficiency judgments that 
have occurred within this state over the years  ,  and allowing 
petitions to reopen finalized deficiency judgments would impose    
 
 51 
                      
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
a significant effect on the administration of justice    .   See  
id.; see also  HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) (permitting courts to upon 
motion relieve a party of final judgment for any “reason 
justifying relief from the operation of the judgment”). Therefore,  our adoption of the majority rule is prospective in
effect and applies only to foreclosure cases in which a 31
 
31 Citing federal caselaw, the dissent counsels that “we do not 
promulgate new rules to be applied prospectively only[.]” Dissent at 1 3 n.4 
(quoting James B. Beam Distilling Co. v. Georgia, 501 U.S. 529, 547 (1991) 
(Blackmun, J., concurring)). Respectfully, the citation is simply inappositebecause that case concerned “a newly declared constitutional rule,” James B. Beam Distilling Co., 501 U.S. at 547 (Blackmun, J. concurring), and more 
significantly, the courts of this state are not subject to the limitations of
the federal case and controversy requirement cited by Justice Blackmun.  Additionally, Justice Blackmun was not advocating against the prospectiveapplication of a new rule, instead he was arguing that the Court’s decisionwas required to be applied both prospectively and retroactively. It is also 
well settled that “[w]hen questions of state law are at issue, state courts 
generally have the authority to determine the retroactivity of their own
decisions.” Garcia, 96 
Hawai ‘i at 211, 29 P.3d at 930; State v. Yong Shik 
Won, 137 Hawai ‘i 330, 355 n.49, 372 P.3d 1065, 1090 n.49 (2015); Schwartz v. 
State, 136 Hawai‘ i 258, 272, 361 P.3d 1161, 1175 (2015). Our decision to 
apply the holding in this case only prospectively is based on the application
of the factors set forth in our precedent. We note, at oral argument, 
HawaiiUSA’s counsel specifically stated that if this court were “inclined to
adopt the majority view and to adopt a new rule for calculating deficiencyjudgments . . . it should be prospective in application.”  Oral Argument at
00:59:07- 19, HawaiiUSA v. Monalim, (No. SCWC- 16-0000807), 
http://oaoa.hawaii.gov/jud/oa/19/SCOA_011119_SCWC_16_807.mp3
[https://perma.cc/TBK2 -9K9G] .  
In addition, this course of applying our decisions prospectively
is one we have frequently followed when doing so is in the interests of 
justice. See, e.g., Chen v. Mah, 146 Hawai ʻi 157, 177, 457 P.3d 796, 816 
(2020) (applying a holding prospectively); State v. Torres, 144 Hawai ‘i 282,
295, 439 P.3d 234, 247 (2019) (same); State by Office of Consumer Prot. v. 
Joshua, 141 Hawaiʻ i 91, 98- 99, 405 P.3d 527, 534 -35 (2017) (same); State v. 
Auld, 136 Hawai ‘i 244, 255- 56, 361 P.3d 471, 482 -83 (2015) (same); In re T.M., 
131 Hawai‘ i 419, 319 P.3d 338 (2014) (same); State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai ‘i 
495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010) (same); Jess, 117 Hawai ‘i at 404, 184 P.3d at 156 
(same); Kahale v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 104 Hawai ‘i 341, 348, 90 P.3d 233, 
240 (2004) (same); Lindinha v. Hilo Coast Processing Co., 104 Hawai ‘i 164, 
170, 86 P.3d 973, 979 (2004) (same); Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai‘ i 226, 238,
900 P.2d 1293, 1305 (1995) (same); State v. Stanley , 60 Haw. 527, 533, 592
P.2d 422, 426 (1979) (same).   
 
 52 
   
  Based on the foregoing, we vacate the ICA’s August 16,
2018 Judgment on Appeal, the circuit court’s Order Granting 
Deficiency Judgment,  and the Deficiency Judgment, and the case 
is remanded to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with  
this opinion.   
                     
  
  
 
    /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna/s/ Richard W. Pollack/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
deficiency judgment is first entered after the date of this  
opinion.    32 
IV. CONCLUSION 
 
 
Gary Victor Dubin 
(Frederick J. Arensmeyer
with him on the briefs, application, and reply) 
for petitioners  
Thomas J. Berger  
(Jonathan W.Y. Lai and   
Tracey L. Ohta with him   
on the briefs and response)for respondent  
 
32 In the event a deficiency judgment is entered on remand, our
adoption of the majority rule will not be applicable to the Monalims as the
Deficiency Judgment was initially entered before the date of this decision. 