 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________ ___ ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-22-0000349 07-OCT-2024 10:07 AM Dkt. 25 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT  
 OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
---o0o---
IN THE MATTER OF THE TAX APPEAL OF HAWAIIAN AIRLINES, INC., 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant,  
vs.  
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION,  
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee.  
SCWC-22-0000349  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-22-0000349; CIV. NO. 1CTX-21-0000493)  
 
OCTOBER 7, 2024  
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, GINOZA, AND DEVENS, JJ.  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction and summary 
This is an appeal from a complaint filed in the Tax Appeal 
Court for the State of Hawaiʻi (“tax court”) . The case stems 
from a contract between Hawaiian Airlines (“Hawaiian”) and   
    
 
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
   
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Boeing. Hawaiian agreed to indemnify Boeing for any taxes 
Boeing might incur for maintenance supply parts it sold to 
Hawaiian . Boeing apparently did not remit Hawaiʻi general excise 
taxes (“GET”) on its sales of maintenance parts to Hawaiian and 
others. The State of Hawaiʻi Department of Taxation (“ the 
Department ”) conducted an audit of Boeing for tax years 2013 -
2018. Boeing claimed that the GET Aircraft Mainten ance 
Exemption (“exemption”) of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 
237-24.9 (2017) applied to its sales of maintenance parts. 
A January 2020 inter-office memorandum from the 
Department’s auditor recommend ed against application of the 
exemption. Boeing then shared with the D epartment a letter it 
received from Hawaiian explaining why it thought the exemption 
applied and asked for the auditor’s thoughts on the matter. In 
a September 24, 2020 email, the auditor indicated disagree ment 
but welcomed further question s. 
On May 21, 2021, the D epartment sent Boeing a letter 
indicating the audit had been closed. The letter said, “notices 
of proposed and final assessment will be mailed under separate 
cover” and that if Boeing disagreed with the proposed 
assessment, to refer to the “Taxpayer Bill of Rights ,” 
(sometimes “TBOR”), which would also be enclosed. The notice of 
proposed assessment (sometimes “NOPA”) and TBOR were also mailed 
that day. 
2   
  
   
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
On June 9, 2021, Hawaiian remitted payment of 
$1,624,482.75, representing  its portion of Boeing’s GET 
liability, to be credited on June 17, 2021, along  with  a letter 
of protest under HRS §  40-35  (2009).   1
1 HRS § 40 -35 provides as follows: 
§ 40-35 Payment to State under protest. 
(a) Any disputed portion of moneys representing a 
claim in favor of the State may be paid under protest to 
a . . . department . . . with which the claimant has the 
dispute. The protest shall be in writing, signed by the 
person making the payment, or by the person ’s agent, and 
shall set forth the grounds of protest. If any payment, or 
any portion of any payment, is made under protest, the 
public accountant to whom the payment is made shall hold 
that portion of the moneys paid under protest in a trust 
account in the state treasury for a period of thirty days 
from the date of payment. 
(b) Action to recover moneys paid under protest or 
proceedings to adjust the claim may be commenced by the 
payer or claimant against the public accountant to whom the 
payment was made, in a court of competent jurisdiction, 
within thirty days from the date of payment. If no suit or 
proceeding is brought within the thirty -day period, the 
money paid under protest shall be deposited into the 
appropriate account in the treasury of the State by the 
accountant and the amount deposited shall thereupon become 
a government realization. Any action to recover payment of 
taxes under protest shall be commenced in the tax appeal 
court. 
(c) If action to recover the money paid under protest 
or a proceeding to adjust the claim is commenced within the 
thirty-day period, the amount paid under protest shall, 
pending final decision of the cause, be deposited by the 
public accountant into the state treasury, in a fund to be 
known as the “litigated claims fund ”, together with 
subsequent payments or portions thereof, made to the 
accountant under the same protest. If judgment is rendered 
in favor of the claimant, the claimant shall be paid the 
amount of the judgment out of the litigated claims . . . . 
[I]f the claim is for the recovery of taxes paid under 
protest by the claimant, the rate of interest and the 
overpayment of taxes shall be refunded in the manner 
provided in section 231 -23(c) and (d). . . . If judgment 
is rendered against the claimant, the amount of money paid 
by the claimant under protest which is in the litigated 
claims fund shall be deposited into the appropriate account 
in the treasury of the State and the amount shall become a 
government realization. 
(continued . . .) 
3   
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Hawaiian then filed the underlying lawsuit in the tax court 
on June 10, 2021, alleging jurisdiction under HRS § 40-35, 
seeking a declaration that GET was not owed based on the 
exemption , and requesting a refund of its payment. 
The Department issued its final assessment on July 26, 
2021. 
The Department then filed a motion to dismiss the lawsuit, 
which the tax court granted.2 The tax court ruled the inter -
office memorandum, the September email between the auditor and 
Boeing, and the May 2021 letter did not constitute “adverse 
rulings” or a “final agency decision” creating an “actual 
dispute” as required for a payment under protest, and that the 
tax court therefore did not have jurisdiction. The tax court 
did not address the NOPA, which was referenced in the complaint 
and included in the record and arguments. 
The tax court based its dismissal on this court’s opinion 
in Grace Business Development Corp. v. Kamikawa , 92 Hawaiʻi 608, 
994 P.2d 540 (2000) (“Grace II ”).3 In Grace II , the company had 
made a payment under protest after receiving notice from the 
(. . .continued) 
(Emphasis added.)  
2 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
3 Grace II adopted then I ntermediate Court of Appeals Associate Judge 
Simeon Acoba’s dissenting opinion in Grace Business Development Corp. v. 
Kamikawa , 92 Hawaiʻi 659, 994 P.2d 591 (App. 1999) (“Grace I”). 
4   
   
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Department that it was commencing an audit. 92 Hawai ʻi at 610, 
994 P.2d at 542. We held “that, in the absence of a formal  
administrative decision by the Director, Grace’s payment under 
protest did not represent an actual dispute within the meaning 
of HRS §  
40-35.” Grace, 92 Hawaiʻi at  614, 994 P.2d at  546. We 
stated:  
The requirement of a formal administrative decision, suc h 
as a notice of assessment, denial of refund, or an adverse 
ruling, prior to filing suit under HRS § 40 –35 is 
consistent with HRS § 632 –1 (1993), which requires an 
“actual controversy” in order to confer jurisdiction and 
provides that “declaratory relief may not be obtained ... 
in any controversy with respect to taxes .” In contrast, 
permitting Grace to demand that the Director resolve the 
question whether Grace is entitled to the refund requested 
by paying under protest before an audit is completed or any 
formal decision is made, in effect, grants Grace 
declaratory relief in contravention of HRS § 632 –1. 
92 Hawaiʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545  (cleaned up).  
The  Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed  the tax 
court’s  dismissal.  
On certiorari, Hawaiian  argues  that: (1)  the final 
assessment cannot be the only  evidence of a “final agency 
decision” supporting tax court jurisdiction;  (2) Grace II  
allowed lower courts to determine whether an official agency 
communication is an “adverse ruling”; (3)  the administrative 
exhaustion requirement cannot be a hard jurisdictional rule 
because this court’s precedent tolerates some error; and  (4)  
where the Department ’s own guidance on  payments under protest 
fails to advise taxpayers of the administrative exhaustion 
5   
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
requirement, the Department should not be allowed to argue that 
lack of exhaustion mandates lower court dismissal. 
With respect to Hawaiian’s first question on certiorari , 
whether a final assessment is the only evidence of a “final 
agency decision” supporting tax court jurisdiction , we answer 
no. Although t he inter-office memorandum, the September email 
between the auditor and Boeing, and the May 2021 letter may not 
have qualified as final administrative decisions , the NOPA 
clearly did. In our analysis of the first question, w e also 
address Hawaiian’s fourth question on certiorari regarding the 
Department’s confusing guidance . 
With respect to Hawaiian’s second question on certiorari , 
Grace II does allow courts to determine whether there was an 
“actual dispute.” By holding that a NOPA constitute s a “formal 
administrative decision” sufficient to create an “actual 
dispute” for HRS § 40-35 jurisdiction purposes, we do not 
preclude courts from recognizing other “formal administrative 
decisions.” 
Finally, w ith respect to Hawaiian’s third question on 
certiorari, that the administrative exhaustion set forth in the 
language of HRS § 40-35 and in Grace II should be seen as 
“nonjurisdictional procedural requirements to promote the 
orderly progress of litigation,” Grace II clearly held 
otherwise . Under t he doctrine of stare decisis, we see no 
6   
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
compelling justification to depart from its holding. See Chung 
Mi Ahn v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co. , 126 Hawaiʻi 1, 10, 265 P.3d 
470, 479 (2011 ) (explaining that a court should “not depart from 
the doctrine of stare decisis without some compelling 
justification”) . 
In summary, w e vacate the tax court’s May 16, 2022 orders 
regarding the summary judgment motions and its final judgment , 
as well as the ICA’s April 18, 2024 judgment on appeal , and we 
remand to the tax court for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
II. Background 
A. Factual background 
1. Contract between Hawaiian and Boeing 
On or about January 30, 2001, Hawaiian and Boeing entered 
into a “Customer Services General Terms Agreement Relating to 
Boeing Aircraft” (“the Contract”) . Boeing agreed to supply 
parts for Hawaiian’s fleet of Boeing aircraft and any additional 
units as required by the Contract . The Contract also provided 
that Hawaiian would pay Boeing “the amount of any sales, use, 
value-added, gross receipts, stamp, excise, transfer, and 
similar ta xes imposed by any domestic or foreign taxing 
authority arising out of or in connection with the Contract [.]” 
The tax indemnity provision states: 
7   
  
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
“Taxes” are defined as all taxes, fees, charges or duties 
and any interest, penalties, fines, or other additions to 
tax, including, but not limited to, sales, use, value -
added, gross receipts, stamp, excise, transfer and similar 
taxes imposed by any domestic or foreign taxing authority 
arising out of or in connection with this CSGTA [the 
Contract] or an Order. Except for U.S. federal and U.S. 
state income taxes and Washington State business and 
occupation tax imposed on Boeing, Customer will be 
responsible for and pay all Taxes. 
2. Boeing audit 
Boeing filed its annual GET returns for tax years 2013 -
2018, claiming an exemption for its sale of maintenance parts 
under HRS § 237 -24.9, which provides in part: 
(a) This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from 
the servicing and maintenance of aircraft or from the construction of an aircraft service and maintenance 
facility in the State.  
(b) As used in this section:  
 . . . . 
“Aircraft service and maintenance” means all scheduled and 
unscheduled tasks performed within an aircraft service and 
maintenance facility for the inspection, modification, 
maintenance, and repair of aircraft and related components 
including engines, hydraulic and electrical systems, and 
all other components which are an integral part of an aircraft.  
“Maintenance” means the upkeep of aircraft engines, 
hydraulic and electrical systems, and all other components 
which are an integral part of an aircraft, but does not include refueling, janitorial services or cleaning, 
restocking of aircraft and passenger supplies, or loading 
or unloading of cargo and passenger baggage. 
   . . .. 
HRS § 23 7-24.9. 
On February 19, 2019, an auditor from the Department  
informed Boeing that she had been assigned to audit Boeing for 
all years in which the statute of limitations had not expired.   
The letter also stated that Boeing would not be allowed to claim 
the GET exemption for non-qualifying retailing.    
8   
   
 
     
    
  
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
After Boeing told the Department it was challenging denial 
of the GET exemption for sale of maintenance parts , it asked 
Hawaiian to substantiate that its aircraft maintenance facility 
satisfied HRS § 237-24.9. Hawaiian submitted a letter to Boeing 
explaining why it thought the exemption applie d.4 In a January 
6, 2020 email, Boeing asked the auditor to review Hawaiian’s 
letter, outlining its understanding of facts relevant to the 
exemption , and asking her to let Boeing know her thoughts and 
next steps .5 
On September 24, 2020, Hawaiian sent Boeing a letter 
further insisting that the exemption applied. On September 25, 
2020, Boeing provided the auditor with a copy of Hawaiian’s 
letter and asked for her thoughts. On October 29, 2020, the 
auditor replied to Boeing’s email as follows: 
We disagree with your customer’s interpretation of the 
Exemption in their Letter.  
Our position remains the same. Please note the following: 
4 Hawaiian services its aircraft in its maintenance facility at the 
Daniel K. Inouye Honolulu International Airport ( “the airport”). Hawaiian 
has two maintenance hangars at the airport. During the audit pe riod of 2013 
to 2018, Hawaiian provided services using Boeing 717 and 767 aircraft. When 
servicing its Boeing aircraft, Hawaiian occasionally replaces existing , worn, 
or damaged aircraft parts with new or refurbished parts purchased from Boeing 
because, if not, Hawaiian m ight be unable to return the aircraft to service 
without violating federal law. 
5 According to the auditor’s supplemental declaration, she received 
Hawaiian’s letter from Boeing and did not directly communicate with Hawaiian 
regarding Boeing’s tax liability during the Boeing audit. She stated she 
believed Hawaiian to be Boeing’s customer, and nothing in the record 
indicates that the auditor or the D epartment were aware that Hawaiian was 
indemnifying Boeing for a part of Boeing’s tax liability (regarding a letter 
from Hawaiian that Boeing shared with her, she stated “[t]hank you for your 
email and a letter . . . from your customer”) . 
9   
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
  
 
       
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
- Boeing sale of parts alone to your customer does not 
qualify for the Exemption; the sale is subject to GET 
at 4% tax rate .  
- Boeing sale of parts alone to your customer for use 
on other airlines ’  aircraft may be subject to ½% 
instead of 4% GET.  The sale is not an exempt sale, 
as it may have been misinterpreted.  
- A use tax exempt is available if your customer 
imports the aircraft spare parts for its own use.  
It is the legislature [’s]  intent to exclude sales of 
material, parts, or tools in the Exemption; per 
Legislature committee reports in 1997 and 1998 when 
the Exemption was enacted.  
- The Exemption is for services provided to a customer 
not on sales of parts alone to its customers.  
During the audit, Boeing asked the auditor for an estimate 
of the amount of retail sales per audit that resulted from the 
sale of aircraft parts by Boeing to Hawaiian. Boeing also 
requested that a sales schedule be produced only for Hawaiian. 
In a May 2 1, 2021 letter from the Director of Taxation , the 
Department informed Boeing that the audit was closed, summarized 
what the Department was proposing (including the proposed 
disallowance of the claims under the exemption), and stated that 
“the notices of proposed and final assessments will be maile d 
under separate cover[ .]” The letter also said if Boeing 
disagreed with the proposed assessment, it should refer to the 
TBOR, which would also be enclosed , for further information . 
On May 21, 2021, t he auditor emailed Boeing a copy of this 
letter and the NOPA, along with the summary of sales schedule 
that Boeing requested. 
The NOPA stated: 
10   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
NOTICE OF PROPOSED ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL EXCISE AND/OR 
USE TAX 
Important  Note: RESPONSE REQUIRED WITHIN 30 DAYS  
An audit examination has been completed in accordance with 
the provisions of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS). Please review this Notice of Proposed Assessment carefully as it 
provides detailed information  about the assessment and 
payment due.  
 . . . . 
What do you need to do? 
You must take action within 30 days from the Proposed 
Assessment Mail Date : 
▪If you agree with this Notice of Proposed Assessment, 
please mail your payment with the Payment Voucher 
(bottom of page 3 of this letter) to the address 
printed on the voucher or use Hawaii Tax Online 
(hitax.hawaii.gov, “Make Payment” under Quick Links). 
▪If you disagree with this assessment, send a written 
response or contact the Preparer indicated below. 
You may instead appeal in accordance with the Hawaii 
Taxpayer Bill of Rights (page 2 of this letter). 
Please reference the Letter ID above when contacting 
us. 
What happens if you do not take action? 
If you do not take action within 30 days from the Proposed 
Assessment Mail Date, a Final Assessment will be mailed to 
you. 
(Emphasis in the original) . Paragraph VI of the TBOR (dated 
October, 2019 ), enclosed with the NOPA, read as follows: 
VI. Audits and Assessment . Taxpayers have a right to a 
Proposed Notice of Assessment. . . . A Proposed Notice of 
Assessment . . . (1) explains the basis for the assessment 
of taxes, penalties, and interest; (2) informs taxpayers of 
their right to request clarification or to object to the 
tax assessment within 30 days from the date the Proposed 
Notice of Assessment was mailed; and ( 3) informs taxpayers 
that the proposed tax assessment will become final after 
the expiration of 30 days from the mailing of t he Proposed 
Notice of Assessment. Taxpayers have a right to a Final 
Notice of Assessment, issued after the expiration of 30 
days from the mailing of the Proposed Notice of Assessment, 
that provides the basis for the tax assessment, and informs 
the taxpayer of the procedure for appealing the assessment. 
Taxpayers have a right to request a meeting with the 
auditor or collector, their supervisor, or senior 
11   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
management to discuss a Proposed or Final Notice of 
Assessment if they do not agree with the tax assessment. 
Taxpayers have a right to request that the Department 
consider a closing agreement to reduce a Proposed or Final 
Assessment. Closing agreement s are final. 
Paragraph VII of the T BOR then discusses “Tax 
Appeals/Payment Under Protest.” After discussing “ Tax Appeals ,” 
there is a section entitled “ Payment Under Protest .” The latter 
says: 
Payment Under Protest: In lieu of filing an appeal, or if 
an appeal is not filed  with the board of review, with the 
tax appeal court, or with the Adm inistrative Appeals Office 
within 30 days from the date the Final Notice of Assessment 
was mailed, the taxpayer may pay the disputed tax 
assessment under writte n  protest and seek to recover the 
taxes by filing an action in ta x  appeal court within 30 
days from the date of payment.  
(Emphasis added) . 
Also included with the NOPA and TBOR was an “Assessment 
Summary” detailing additional GET amounts owed by Boeing for tax 
years from 2013 to 2018 , totaling $ 1,965,290.57 , as well as 
breakdowns of amounts owed for each tax year. Enclosed with the 
Department’s letter was also an official tax “PAYMENT VOUCHER” 
that indicated the specific “Amount Due” and directions on how 
to make the payment by check or online. 
Neither Boeing nor Hawaiian appealed the NOPA or contacted 
the Department to disagree with it. The auditor was under the 
impression that Boeing would be paying the taxes set forth in 
the NOPA. 
12   
  Instead, in a June 8, 2021 letter, Boeing informed Hawaiian 
that it had received the  May 21, 2021 NOPA.   This  letter 
attached the calculation of Hawaiian’s share  of the GET, 
totaling  $1,624,482.75.   Boeing told Hawaiian:  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Per the provisions of our contract, we are asking Hawaiian 
Airlines either to pay this amount [$ 1,624,482.75 ] to us or 
remit it to the State of Hawaii directly on our behalf. If 
Hawaiian Airlines decides upon the latter, please provide 
us satisfactory evidence to show that the amount has been 
remitted to the credit of our General Excise Tax account. 
 Therefore, on June 9, 2021, Hawaiian submitted payment in 
Boeing’s account on Hawaiʻi Tax Online,  scheduling a payment of 
$1,624,482.75 to be credited  on June 17, 2021.   In a letter 
dated June 9, 2021 submitted on Hawaiian’s Hawai ʻi Tax Online 
account, Hawaiian stated:  6
Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. (Taxpayer) is remitting the sum of 
1,624,48 2.75 due for Primary Taxpayer’s General Excise Tax 
[Boeing], being part of the tax assessed in the Notice of 
Proposed Assessment dated May 21, 2021 and identified as 
Letter L2098932992. 
Taxpayer is under a contract with Primary Taxpayer that 
requires Taxpayer to pay General Excise Tax due on payments 
under the contract.  This contractual obligation allows 
Taxpayer to succeed to Primary Taxpayer’s appeal rights under HRS section 232 -1.   This payment was remitted to the 
Department via Hawaii Tax Online on June 9, 2021, with 
confirmation number 1 -255-440-128.  
This amount is being paid UNDER PROTEST pursuant to HRS 
Sec. 40-35 because: 
• Taxpayer’s payment to Primary Taxpayer, on which 
the tax being remitted is based, is exempt from 
General Excise Tax under HRS Sec. 237 -24.9.  
Hawaiʻi Tax Online is an online portal where taxpayers may make 
payments, respond to letters received by the D epartment , and file returns, 
among other additional services. See Hawaiʻi Tax Online , 
https://hitax.hawaii.gov/_/ [https://perma.cc/5JAK -CAEU]. 
13 6   
  
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
In a June 22, 2021 email , Boeing informed the Department 
that two payments should have been posted on its account on June 
17, 2021, one by Hawaiian and one by Boeing, and asked that the 
auditor let them know when the payments were applied so that 
Boeing could close out its audit file . The portion Boeing paid 
represented GET taxes owed for Boeing’s sale of retail parts to 
other customers . Boeing’s portion was not paid under protest. 
B. Tax court proceedings 
On June 10, 2021, Hawaiian filed the subject complaint in 
tax court. Hawaiian claimed the Department wrongly disallowed 
the exemption . Hawaiian indicated it succeeded to Bo eing’s 
appeal rights as the party contractually required to pay a 
portion of Boeing’s assessed taxes pursuant to HRS § 232 -1 
(2017).7 
On June 25, 2021, a “Notice of Corrected Proposed 
Assessment of General Excise and/or Use Tax for the Relevant Tax 
Years” was mailed to Boeing to correct Boeing’s last known 
address.   On July 26, 2021, forty-six  days after Hawaiian filed 
7HRS § 232 -1 provides: 
Whenever any person is under a contractual obligation to 
pay a tax assessed against another, the person shall have 
the same rights of appeal to the taxation board of review, 
the tax appeal court, and the intermediate appellate court, 
subject to chapter 602, in the person ’s own name, as if the 
tax were assessed against the person. The person against 
whom the tax is assessed shall also have a right to appear 
and be heard on any such application or appeal. 
14   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
       
    
      ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
its complaint and thirty-nine days after Hawaiian’s payment, the 
“Notice of Final Assessment of General Excise and/or Use Tax for 
the Relevant Tax Years” was mailed to Boeing. 
1. The Department ’s motion to dismiss or cross motion for 
summary judgment 
a. The Department ’s motion 
On December 10, 2021, the Department  filed a motion to 
dismiss, or in the alternative, cross motion for summary 
judgment (“motion to dismiss”).    
The Department  first cited  the ICA’s decision in Grace I, 
92 Hawaiʻi 659, 994 P.2d 591, and this court ’s reversal of that 
opinion in Grace II, 92 Hawaiʻ i 608,  994 P.2d 540. The 
Department cited  Judge Acoba’s dissent in Grace I  discussing  HRS 
§ 40-35 and its 1967 amendment “to ensure that only funds 
relating ‘to the issues a ctually in dispute’ may be paid under 
protest.” 92 Hawai ʻi at 672-73, 994 P.2d at 604-05 (Acoba,  J., 
dissenting) (quoting S. Stand. Com. Rep. No. 542, in 1967 Senate 
Journal, at 1096).      
The Department highlighted Grace II’s holding that in the 
absence of a formal administrative decision by the D epartment , a 
payment under protest did not represent an actual dispute within 
the meaning of HRS § 40-35. 92 Hawaiʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545 . 
The Department argued the NOPA here was not the actual 
assessment of taxes. It cited HRS § 237 -36 (2017), which 
15   
   
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
provides that “[a]fter the expiration of thirty days from the 
notification [of the proposed assessment] the department shall 
assess the gross income or gross proceeds of sales of the 
taxpayer[.]” The Department asserted that only the final 
assessment “represents the culmination of an administrative 
procedure in which a taxpayer is first informed of a proposed 
assessment and given an opportunity to file an administrative 
protest before the assessment is finalized [.]” Priceline.com , 
Inc. v. Dir. of Taxation , 144 Hawaiʻi 72, 76 n.8, 436 P.3d 1155, 
1159 n.8 (2019) . 
The Department argued that there was no actual dispute 
because Boeing did not dispute the taxes asserted against it, 
and because no final assessment was issued at the time Hawaiian 
made payment or filed its complaint, the case should be 
dismissed for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 
b. Hawaiian’s opposition 
Hawaiian filed its opposition to the motion to dismiss on 
January 27, 2022. Hawaiian pointed out the absence of a dispute 
between Boeing and the Department was to be expected, as Boeing 
had a contractual indemnity from Hawaiian. Hawaiian also argued 
the lack of a final assessment at the time the suit was filed 
did not defeat the ta x court’s jurisdiction because the 
Department had ruled on the issue. 
16   
    
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Hawaiian highlight ed our ruling in Grace II that the tax 
court has jurisdiction to hear taxpayer appeals from 
assessments, challenges to taxes paid under protest, and adverse 
rulings by the Director . 92 Hawaiʻi at 612, 992 P.2d at 544 
(emphasis added). Hawaiian argue d the Department ruled on the 
exemption via its October 29, 2020 email to Boeing reject ing 
Hawaiian’s position and the May 21, 2021 closing letter stating 
the exemption would not be applied . Hawaiian pointed out these 
“rulings” were incorporated into the proposed and final 
assessments ; thus, at the time the suit was filed, there was an 
active controversy between Hawaiian and the D epartment . 
Hawaiian also indicated that, as Boeing’s indemnitor, it 
did not know of the proposed or final assessments, but it was 
given a copy of the auditor ’s October 19, 2020 letter. Hawaiian 
accordingly “accepted this ruling as the Department’s word on 
the subject.” 
Furthermore, Hawaiian argue d that although the funds were 
not actually transferred until a few days after its complaint, 
the tax court’s jurisdiction was not defeated. HRS § 40-35 only 
requires that suit be pending within the 30-day period after the 
payment. Here, the D epartment had notice of the suit and knew 
the amount deposited was in dispute and needed to go into the 
litigated claims fund . Hawaiian argued that t he case here is 
unlike that in Captain Andy’s Sailing, Inc . v. Department of 
17   
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
   
   
   
  
 
     
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Land and Nat ural Resources, 113 Hawaiʻi 184, 150 P.3d 833 (2006), 
in which we held that a suit was subject to dismissal when 
commenced more than 30 -days after the disputed payment was made. 
Here, payment was made contemporaneou sly with its letter in 
protest of payment and suit was filed with in the 30 -day period . 
Hawaiian argued d ismissal of this case would cause the 
disputed taxes of over $1.6 million dollars to become a lawful 
government realization, akin to a severe sanction. Because “the 
governing statutes do not rob the tax appeal court of the power 
to hear aggrieved taxpayer petitions from adverse rulings by the 
Tax Director,” Hawaiian contended the tax court had 
jurisdiction. In re Aloha Motors, Inc. , 69 Hawaiʻi 515, 520, 750 
P.2d 81, 84 (1988) . 
c. The Department’s reply 
On February 2, 2022, the D epartment filed its reply brief. 
It reiterate d arguments set forth in its motion. The Department 
argued the October 29, 2020 email to Boeing, the May 21, 2021 
closing letter, and its proposed assessment were not formal 
administrative decisions because they were part of the 
administrative procedures necessary to finalize the audit of 
Boeing. The Department argued the final assessment against 
Boeing was the formal administrative decision. 
In response to Hawaiian’s argument that , as indemnitor, it 
was unaware of the proposed and final assessments, the 
18   
   
   
   
    
  
 
 
   
     
 
   
 
  
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Department argued Hawaiian had knowledge of the Boeing audit and 
the proposed assessment, and actively participated in the 
process. The Department contended there was nothing in the 
record demonstrating that Hawaiian could not request a copy of 
the assessments from Boeing or the Department . 
2. Supplemental briefing on the motion to dismiss 
At the first hearing , on February 7, 2022, t he tax court 
invited further briefing on the following issues relating to the 
Department ’s motion to dismiss: (1) whether the D irector was 
likely to issue the final assessment after payment was made; and 
(2) whether there was an “actual dispute” between the D irector 
and Hawaiian at the time of payment of taxes assessed against 
Boeing. 
a. The Department ’s supplemental memorandum 
On April 21, 2022, the D epartment filed its supplemental 
memorandum. It reiterate d most of its previous arguments. The 
Department asserted a final assessment must be issued even if 
taxes are paid. Final assessments are issued to post t he 
assessed tax liability on the taxpayer’s account . If one is not 
issued, there would be no record of the taxpayer ’s tax liability 
to which the payment of taxes can be applied. The Hawaiʻi TBOR 
provides that taxpayers have a right to a final notice of 
assessment, issued thirty days after the mailing of the proposed 
assessment, providing the basis for the tax assessment an d 
19   
    
     
   
    
  
  
 
     
 
   
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
informing the taxpayer of the procedures for appealing the 
assessment. The Department received no inquiry from Hawaiian 
regarding the issuance of the final assessment. 
Regarding the October 29, 2020 email, the D epartment added 
it was unaware of Hawaiian’s contractual obligation to Boeing, 
as the communication s were between the D epartment and Boeing. 
The email expressly asked Boeing to let the auditor know if it 
had any questions on the matter, and , according to the 
Department, the auditor would have considered further response s 
or information had Boeing followed up. The Department thus 
asserts, at best, the email was an expression of a “difference[] 
of opinion” rather than a “formal administrative decision.” 
b. Hawaiian ’s supplemental opposition 
On April 29, 2022, Hawaiian filed its supplemental 
opposition. Hawaiian also reiterate d most of its previous 
arguments. 
Hawaiian assert ed the Department rendered at least three 
“rulings” to satisfy the actual controversy requirement of HRS § 
40-35. Hawaiian posit ed that a “ruling” is a construction of 
tax laws and that no particular form is required. Hawaiian also 
asserted there is no requirement that a ruling be printed on 
Department letterhead or come from a particular person in the 
Department and that a “ruling” is not final as the D epartment 
reserves the discretion to reconsider final assessments pursuant 
20   
      
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
to HAR § §18-231-3-1.18 and -1.29 (eff. 2016). Additionally, 
Hawaiian argued that a “ruling” need not be “final ,” as the tax 
8 HAR §18-231-3-1.1 governs a request for reconsideration of assessment 
and provides for the process by which a taxpayer can request the D epartment 
to grant reconsideration of such a request. A request for reconsideration of 
assessment is purely administrative and the D epartment has the sole 
discretion in granting or denying any request. HAR § 18 -231-3-101(b), (c). 
Any request must be submitted as follows: 
(d) A request for reconsideration of assessment shall be 
made by the taxpayer in writing to the auditor or tax 
return examiner listed on the Notice of Final Assessment or 
Denial Letter. The request for reconsideration of 
assessment shall be signed by the taxpayer and shall 
include: 
(1) A detailed summary of facts and circumstances 
that the taxpayer believes would, if taken into 
consideration, result in a different assessment; 
(2) A list of documentation, evidence, or other 
information not previously considered by the 
department that supports the taxpayer’s position 
under paragraph (1); provided that if the department 
grants a request for reconsideration of assessment 
under subsection (g), the taxpayer shall provide all 
such listed documentation, evidence, or other 
information within thirty days unless otherwise 
specified by the department; and 
(3) An explanation of why the taxpayer did not 
provide the facts, documentation, evidence, or 
information under paragraphs (1) and (2) during the 
audit or before the department issued the Notice of 
Final Assessment or Denial Letter. 
HAR § 18- 231-3-1.1(d). HAR § 18 -231-3-1.1(g) provides that the 
Department  must notify a taxpayer about the grant or denial of a 
request in writing. If granting such request, the Department  must also 
notify the taxpayer that “reconsideration of assessment does not affect 
the taxpayer’s appeal rights and the taxpayer should take steps to 
ensure it perfects any appeal rights related to the existing Notice of Final Assessment or Denial Letter.” HAR § 18 -231-3-1.1(g)(2).  
9 HAR § 18 -231-3-1.2 (eff. 2016) provides: 
(a) For purposes of this section, “reconsideration 
of assessment” means the process by which the department 
reevaluates the results of: 
(1) A prior audit where tax was assessed and remains 
unpaid; or 
(2) A prior denial of a taxpayer’s claim of a refund 
or tax credit. 
(b) Upon granting a request for reconsideration of 
assessment under section 18 -231-3-1.1, the 
(continued . . .) 
21   
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
laws provide the D epartment may revoke or modify its opinion s 
(citing HAR §§ 18 -231-19.5-03, 18-231-3-1.1, -1.2). 
Hawaiian argued that there were three “rulings” evidencing 
an “actual dispute” under HRS § 40 -35: (1) the October 29, 2020 
email from the auditor to Boeing stating that the exemption did 
not apply to the sale of parts from Boeing to plaintiff; (2) the 
January 20, 2020 interoffice memorandum recommending 
nonapplication of the exemption, signed off by the person within 
the Department in charge of issuing rulings; and (3) the May 21, 
2021 closing letter from the auditor to Boeing, closing the 
audit and stating that the exemption would not be applied. 
Hawaiian posited these three “rulings” demonstrate d there was 
“no realistic prospect of further factual development on which 
the Department ’s opinion could turn,” and thus was the final 
position of the D epartment . 
Hawaiian also argued that the procedural requirements set 
forth in Grace II are non-jurisdictional rules to “promote the 
orderly progress of litigation ” and are subject to equitable 
defenses. Hawaiian cited Boechler, P.C. v. Commissioner of 
(. . .continued) 
department may:  
(1) Request additional substantiation, worksheets, 
spreadsheets, explanations and other documentation; 
and 
(2) Amend or rescind existing assessments, issue new 
assessments, or let existing assessments stand in its 
sole discretion. 
22   
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
    
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Internal Revenue , 596 U.S. 199 (2022), in which the United 
States Supreme Court held that the deadline to petition the tax 
court for review of a collection due process determination was 
not jurisdictional and subject to equitable tolling. Hawaiian 
asserted that the Department “views all procedural requirements 
as jurisdictional ,” but contends that view is incompatible with 
Aloha Motors because nonjurisdictional proced ural requirements 
must exist in Hawaiʻi even though Aloha Motors did not say so 
explicitly . Hawaiian then asserted that the administrative 
exhaustion requirement in Grace II “must be one such non -
jurisdictional procedural requirement” because it is not 
reflected in HRS § 40-35. 
Hawaiian asserted the Department should not be able to 
argue administrative exhaustion under equitable estoppel 
principles because its own guidance on payment under protest 
failed to advise taxpayers a ccordingly. Neither the T BOR nor 
Tax Information Release (“ TIR”) 2002-1,10 documents the 
Department provides as guidance for taxpayers, contain 
administrative exhaustion requirements that must be satisfied 
before making a payment under protest. Hawaiian also insisted 
that under the balance of equities principles, where a party 
State of Hawaii Department of Taxation, Tax Information Release No. 
2002-1, https://files.hawaii.gov/tax/legal/tir/1990_09/tir02 -01.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/XG2L -D2UA]. 
23 10    
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
indemnifies another for tax, the indemnitor would be unaware of 
a notice of final assessment and should not be required to wait 
for one where there is no prejudice to the D epartment . Under 
the doctrine of equitable tolling,11 Hawaiian asserts the 
equities balance in its favor because there was no reason to 
believe that Boeing would share the final assessment notice with 
Hawaiian and the D epartment would not be prejudiced by allowing 
this action to reach the merits, while Hawaiian would suffer a 
$1.6 million loss for the taxes it paid. 
c. The Department ’s supplemental reply 
On May 4, 2022, the D epartment filed its supplemental 
reply. It repeated previous arguments. The Department also 
asserted that under HRS § 237 -36, it is required to follow a 
specified process for an assessment, like providing a notice of 
a proposed assessment and giving taxpayers an opportunity to 
confer with the D epartment for at least thirty days before the 
final assessment. HRS § 231 -17 (2017) provides that notices 
issued by the D epartment are deemed to have been given on the 
date the notice was mailed, properly addressed to the addressee 
at the addressee’s last known address. The Department argued 
Under the doctrine of equitable tolling, we have noted federal law 
provides that to toll a statute of limitations for a complaint filed after 
its expiration, a plaintiff must demonstrate: “(1) that [they] have been 
pursuing their rights diligently, and (2) that some extraordinary 
circumstance stood in [their] way.” Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. State , 110 
Hawaiʻi 338, 360, 133 P.3d 767, 789 (2006) (citations omitted). 
24 11   
  
 
  
 
  
 
             
  
 
 
  
 
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
that any formal administrative decision must comport with these 
requirements. 
The Department countered that the three documents Hawaiian 
relied upon were not “rulings” because they were not the actual 
assessment. The October 29, 2020 email was a part of ongoing 
communications with Boeing; the January 28, 2021 interoffice 
memorandum did not specifically identify Boeing or Hawaiian and 
was used for consultation; and the May 2 1, 2021 closing letter 
was to inform Boeing that the audit was closed and summarize d 
what was being proposed. The Department also responded to 
Hawaiian ’s argumen t that the proposed assessment is the guiding 
assessment because the final assessment is “automatic” based on 
the default in the computer system ; it said an auditor may 
actually override the automatic issuance of a final assessment, 
which may be different from a proposed assessment. 
The Department also argued that the “actual dispute” 
requirement in HRS § 40 -35 is jurisdictional. Citing the 
dissent in Grace I, the Department highlighted former Judge 
Acoba’s analysis of HRS § 40 -35 and its legislative history , and 
the conclusion that until the Department actually assesses the 
taxpayer, the dispute is “not real as of now” as contemplated by 
HRS § 40 -35 and “ [i]n the absence of such a dispute, there would 
be no tax appeal court jurisdiction.” 92 Hawaiʻi at 674, 994 
P.2d at 606 (Acoba , J., dissenting). The Department argued that 
25   
   
       
  
   
 
 
  
   
    
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
in Grace II , we dismissed the case for lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction in accordance with Judge Acoba’s dissent because 
there was no actual dispute. The Department ar gued that this 
court has already concluded the legislature intended the actual 
dispute requirement to be jurisdictional. 
The Department responded to Hawaiian’s argument that 
equitable exceptions apply. The Department posited that while 
it tries to do its best to provide resources that may be 
helpful, like the TBOR and TIR 2002 -1, it cannot be expected to 
explain all possible legal issues that could arise. It further 
argued that equitable tolling does not apply because Hawaiian 
had not met its burden under the equitable tolling standard. 
3. Tax court’s May 9, 2022 hearing 
 On May 9, 2022, the tax court held a hearing on Hawaiian’s 
motion for summary judgment and the D epartment’s  motion to 
dismiss.   After argument from both parties, the tax court ruled 
as follows:   
The issue framed by the motions in this case 
essentially focus upon the subject matter jurisdiction, and 
that the manner in which this court will address the 
question. And the issue is raised because the action was 
filed with some lack of clarity regarding whether the 
requirements of the statute that []all or a dispute portion 
of monies representing a claim in favor of the State were 
paid under protest. That requires a dispute to exist at 
the time of the payment being made, and whether or not a 
dispute do es or does not exist depends upon the conduct or 
behavior of the department and the taxpayer. 
And I must say, as an aside, the circumstances of the 
taxpayer and how it was treated by Boeing is certainly less 
than optimal. At least in this record it suggests that the 
plaintiff in this case was kept in the dark for some 
reason, I don’t know why, and Boeing was not as forthcoming 
26   
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
with information as I would hope entities in a complex and 
very expensive business venture would afford to each other, 
especially when one is contractually obligated to pay the 
general excise tax of the other on such a large scale. But 
be that as it may, and for whatever reason, the parties 
conducted themselves as they did in this case. And the parties I’m referring to are Boeing and Hawaiian Air. That 
still does not excuse this court of its obligation to 
examine whether it does or does not have subject matter 
jurisdiction over this instant action.  
So the principles involved are not complicated. It 
is applying those principles to the facts that become 
complicated. The principles upon which this decision exist 
is that there must be a genuine dispute, an actual dispute 
between the plaintiff and the Department of Taxation at the 
time the payment was made. And whether or not there is 
this actual dispute depends upon whether the plaintiff was 
acting upon “a formal administrative decision ” of the 
department, and that ’s where it becomes complicated. 
Because as the court indicated --indicated, the record 
appears to suggest that from beginning to end the 
department was of the mind that the exemption did not 
apply. And they may have entertained other considerations 
but essentially they ’ve stayed true to that position all 
throughout. 
The taxpayer suggest s that, yes, a formal 
administrative decision within the meaning of the Grace 
Brothers Development case is clearly existing and it was 
embodied in three different writings. Number one was the 
January 28, 2020 interoffice memorandum that discussed the 
exemption in question; number two, the October 29, 2020 
email that disagreed with the taxpayer ’s analysis of the 
exemption issue; and, number three, the May 20, 2021 audit 
closing letter that brought an end to the audit. 
But viewing each one of these documents as carefully 
as the court could and considering the context in which 
they arise, this court is not able to find or conclude that 
any of those three documents constituted a formal 
administrative decision such that there was an actual 
dispute at the time the payment in this case was made under 
protest. 
And not to --to suggest that these comments are 
comprehensive but, number one, the January 28, 2020 
interoffice memorandum is an internal document that was not 
served upon the taxpayer and it cannot be that a formal 
administrative decision of the tax department that that is 
not served upon the taxpayer. To --to constitute a formal 
administrative decision on a tax matter the taxpayer must 
be apprised of that decision. And so that fundamental 
lacking of the interoffice memorandum not being served upon 
the taxpayer cannot constitute a, that interoffice 
memorandum, as a formal administrative decision. 
Number two, the October 29, 2020 email, it certainly 
disagreed with the analysis of the exemption by the 
taxpayer but it certainly did not speak in terms of a 
formal administrative decision. It invited further 
comment. It did not indicate any amounts due and owing. 
27   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
And it --the form of that writing is an email. And as the 
court did indicate throughout the hearing, it is the most 
common form of business communication these days to 
communicate in a transaction by email. And it simply 
undermines the credibility of the phrase “formal 
administrative decision ” to suggest that an email in the 
normal course of business communications would constitute a 
formal administrative decision that would trigger tax 
appeal or tax payment, rights, or obligations. It’s simply 
too flui d a method of communication to constitute a formal 
administrative decision. 
And, number three, the May 20, 2021 audit closing 
letter certainly does not appear to inform the taxpayer of 
an administrative decision.  It has no amounts of taxes in 
it that are due and owing, and it does not suggest the end but appears to be a step in the middle of the process of 
tax assessment because that letter specifically says that a 
proposed and final assessment will follow.  So it appears 
to be yet another step in the continuum of the assessment process.  
The court also considered the argument that the 
statute requires certain formality in concluding the assessment procedure and that is by means of a final 
assessment under 237 -36. The court is not suggesting that 
a final assessment is the only way that a formal administrative decision can be communicated to the taxpayer.   However, it is one of the ways.  Chief Justice 
Moon identified three methods of communicating a formal administrative decision, by way of example, and those would 
be a notice of assessment, a denial of refund, and an 
adverse ruling.  And none of the three documents that were 
urged upon the court by the taxpayer, or the plaintiff, as 
a formal administrative decision constitutes or meets the 
requirements of due process and the purpose of 40 -35.  
There must be some order in terms of the business of 
tax assessment.  And while a final assessment as the court 
indicated is not the only method of triggering tax appeal 
rights and 40 -35 rights, it certainly is one of them and 
none of the other three that are suggested in this case do constitute that formal administrative decision.  
So for these and any other good cause shown in the 
record the court will respectfully grant the tax department's motion to dismiss or for summary judgment on 
the basis of this court lacking subject matter 
jurisdiction.  The court is unable to find that there was 
an actual dispute between the plaintiff and the tax 
department at the time the subject payment under protest 
was made.  There simply -- the court was not able to find a 
“formal administrative decision ”  by the tax department that 
would trigger the 40 -35 rights to make a payment under 
protest.  And therefore the court will also respectfully 
deny the taxpayer ’s motion for summary judgment.  
The tax court filed its orders on the motions for summary 
judgment and the final judgment on May 16, 2022. 
28   
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
C. ICA proceedings 
On May 20, 2022,  Hawaiian filed its notice of appeal, and 
on March 15, 2024, the ICA issued its summary disposition order, 
Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. v. Dept. of Taxation, No. CAAP-22-00349, 
2024 WL 1129759 (Haw. App. Mar. 15, 2024)  (“SDO”).   The ICA held 
the tax court correctly granted the D epartment’s  motion because 
of our decision in Grace II, and that there must be an “actual 
dispute” before a taxpayer can make a payment under protest and 
bring an action under HRS § 40-35.   Hawaiian Airlines, 2024 WL 
1129759, at *2. The ICA also  cited this court’s statement  in 
Grace II  that  “where an administrative decision has not been 
formalized, simply arguing that there is a ‘dispute’  or 
‘difference of opinion ’  with [Tax] Department policy and paying 
taxes under protest does not present an actual dispute under HRS § 40-35.”   Hawaiian Airlines, 2024 WL 1129759, at *2 (quoting 92 
Hawaiʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545). The  ICA  ruled that because 
there  was no formal decision until the July 26, 2021 notice of 
final assessment, after Hawaiian had  already submitted a payment 
under protest and filed this action, Hawaiian could not  rely on 
HRS § 40-35 to invoke the tax court’s jurisdiction ; it  affirmed 
the tax court’s ruling.   Hawaiian Airlines, 2024 WL 1129759, at 
*2. On April 1, 2024, the ICA issued an order denying 
Hawaiian’s motion for reconsideration.   Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. 
29   
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
v. Dept. of Taxation , No. CAAP -22-00349, 2024 WL 1359702 (Haw. 
App. Apr. 1, 2024). 
D. Certiorari proceedings 
On May 13, 2024, Hawaiian filed its application for writ of 
certiorari. Hawaiian presents the following issues: 
1. In a payment under protest suit brought under HRS § 40 -
35 by an indemnitor of a taxpayer under audit, whether the 
Notice of Final Assessment issued to the taxpayer is the 
only evidence of a final agency decision sufficient to 
confer jurisdiction on the court below even if the 
indemnitor is not given notice of said Final Assessment. 
2. In a payment under protest suit brought under HRS § 40 -
35 where it is contended that an “adverse ruling” is 
evidence of final agency decision, whether any factual 
analysis may be engaged in to determine whether a document 
from an official Department of Taxation . . . 
representative purporting to apply the tax laws to the 
indemnitor’s and the taxpayer’s factual situation and give 
the agency’s answer thereto was a “ruling.” 
3. In a payment under protest suit brought under HRS § 40 -
35, whether failure to meet the requirement of final agency 
action is jurisdictional, or is rather a “claim -processing 
rule,” open to exceptions to ensure fundamental fairness 
and justice, as is suggested by In re Aloha Motors, Inc. , 
69 Haw. 515, 750 P.2d 81 (1988). 
4. When the Department in published guidance has notified 
taxpayers of the requirements of payment under protest 
review except for the requirement of final agency decision, 
whether the Department may, contrary to that guidance, 
argue that the suit must be dismissed (and the payment made 
thereby forfeited to the Department) because no final 
agency decision has been made. 
(Emphasis in the original) . 
III. Standard of Review 
A trial court ’s grant or denial of a motion to dismiss for 
“lack of subject matter jurisdiction is a question of law, 
reviewable de novo. ”   Norris v. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc., 74 Haw. 
235, 239, 842 P.2d 634, 637 (1992)  (cleaned up). In Norris, we  
30   
  
 
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
adopted the view of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Love 
v. United States, 871 F.2d 1488, 1491 (9th Cir. 1989), opinion 
amended on other grounds and superseded by Love v. United 
States, 915 F.2d 1242 (9th Cir. 1989), that:  
review of a motion to dismiss for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction is based on the contents of the 
complaint, the allegations of which we accept as true 
and construe in the light most favorable to the 
plaintiff. Dismissal is improper unless it appears 
beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of 
facts in support of his claim which would entitle him 
to relief. 
Norris, 74 Haw. at 240, 842 P.2d at 637 (cleaned up).   “However, 
when considering a motion to dismiss pursuant to [ Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Civil Procedure] Rule 12(b)(1)  [(2000)]  the trial court is 
not restricted to the face of the pleadings, but may review any evidence, such as affidavits and testimony, to resolve factual 
disputes concerning the existence of jurisdiction. ”   Id. 
(cleaned up).  
IV. Discussion 
A. A notice of proposed assessmen t also qualifies as the 
“formal agency decision” required by Grace II to create an 
“actual dispute” for HRS § 40-35 jurisdiction purposes 
In its first question on certiorari , Hawaiian as ks whether 
a final assessment is the only evidence of a “final agency 
decision” supporting tax court jurisdiction under HRS § 40-35. 
We answer no and hold that a notice of proposed assessment also 
suffices to constitute the “formal agency decision” required by 
Grace II . This holding is consistent with Grace II as well as 
31   
  
   
 
  
  
  
     
    
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
“the common law origins of HRS §  40-35 in equity,” as discussed 
by the majority opinion in Grace I.12  
Grace I  and Grace II  involved  Grace, a business 
incorporated under HRS chapter 420, claiming tax exemptions as a 
business development corporation (“BDC”). Grace II, 92 Hawaiʻi 
at 609, 994 P.2d at 541.   In 1997, the Director issued TIR 97-5, 
reflecting a change in the Department ’s policy regarding BDC tax 
exemptions aimed at disallowing exemptions for businesses not intended to benefit from chapter 420. Grace II, 92 Hawai ʻi at 
610, 994 P.2d at 542.  
Grace then received two letters, one providing notice 
regarding TIR 97-5 and the effect  on Grace’s status as a BDC, 
12   Associate Judge John Lim’s majority opinion in Grace I  contains an 
excellent historical analysis of the evolution of Hawaiʻi law regarding tax 
disputes. 92 Hawaiʻi at 664-70, 994 P.2d at 596 -602. Although in Grace II  we 
agreed with then ICA Judge Simeon Acoba’s dissenting opinion that the 
requisite “actual dispute” did not exist under the facts of that case, we 
emphasize the equitable origins of HRS §  40-35, as expounded on by Judge Lim .  
In this regard, we take judicial notice of Hawaiian ’s separate appeal 
of its HRS chapter 237 refund request case in 1CTX-22-0000983. We express no 
opinion on the procedural or substantive merits of that case. We note that 
after the tax appeal court granted the Department’s motion to dismiss this 
case and entered final judgment on May 16, 2022, Hawaiian sent a letter to 
the Department on May 19, 2022, requesting a refund of its payment. When no 
response was received , Hawaiian filed an appeal to the tax court on December 
8, 2022. On March 5, 2024, the tax court ruled that Hawaiian’s claim was not 
precluded by the statute of limitations and that it has jurisdiction over 
that appeal. On July 15, 2024, the tax court entered summary and final 
judgment in favor of the Department, ruling the aircraft maintenance 
exemption inapplicable . On July 25, 2024, Hawaiian appealed the ruling 
regarding inapplicability of the exemption, in CAAP-24-0000496. On August 14, 
2024, the Department cross -appealed the t ax court’s statute of limitations 
ruling. Hence, the Department seeks to retain Hawaiian ’s payment not only on 
substantive grounds but also on procedural grounds, taking the position that 
Hawaiian’s payment was made too soon to invoke HRS § 40-35 jurisdiction yet 
too late to invoke HRS chapter 237 jurisdiction. 
32   
   
  
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
and the other notifying Grace that the Department  was commencing 
an audit of its operations. Id.   The Department  drafted a 
proposed assessment, but no notice of the assessment was sent to 
Grace. Grace II, 92 Hawaiʻi at 611, 994 P.2d at 543.  In 1998, 
although the audit had yet to take place, Grace paid the 
applicable taxes under protest, asserting that because Grace was 
a BDC, it was not subject to Hawai ʻi  GET or transient 
accommodations taxes, nor obligated to report its gross income on such returns. Grace II, 92 Hawai ʻi at 610, 994 P.2d at 542. 
A few days later, Grace filed a complaint in the tax appeal 
court. Id.    
The tax appeal court dismissed the appeal, ruling it lacked 
HRS § 40-35 jurisdiction; the ICA reversed. Grace I, 92 Hawaiʻi 
at 660, 994 P.2d at 592. Then ICA Associate Judge Simeon Acoba 
stated in dissent: 
[A]s a general matter, subject matter jurisdiction rests in 
the tax appeal court to hear taxpayer “appeals” from 
assessments; challenges to taxes paid under protest; and 
adverse rulings by the tax director.   There being neither 
an outstanding assessment nor an adverse ruling by [the Tax 
Director]  in the instant case, the question is whether the 
protest payment by [Grace]  satisfies the requirements of 
HRS § 40– 35 so as to invoke subject matter jurisdiction of 
the tax appeal  court.   I am  of  the opinion  that  it  does  not,  
and therefore would hold that jurisdiction does not lie in 
the tax appeal court.  I consider the legislative history 
of HRS § 40 –35 as supportive of this conclusion.  
Grace  I, 92 Hawaiʻi at  672, 994 P.2d at  604  (Acoba, J., 
dissenting)  (cleaned up).  This  dissent discussed the 
legislative history of HRS §  40-35, which was eventually amended  
33   
     
  
  
 
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
to prohibit funds not “actually in dispute” fr om being paid 
under protest because such funds would be removed from 
governmental use pending judicial resolution of a controversy. 
Grace I, 92 Hawaiʻi at 673-74, 994 P.2d at 605-06 (Acoba, J., 
dissenting) . 
  On certiorari, this court ruled  that  “in the  absence of a 
tax assessment, denial of a refund, or other adverse ruling[,] 
[i]n accord with Associate Judge Acoba’s dissenting opinion, we 
hold that there was no actual dispute within the meaning of HRS 
§ 40-35.” See  Grace II, 92 Hawaiʻi at 609, 994 P.2d at 541.   We 
ruled that absent a “formal administrative decision ”  by the 
Director, Grace’s payment under protest did not represent an 
actual dispute under HRS § 40-35 and affirmed the tax appeal 
court’s dismissal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  
We stated that the 
requirement of a formal administrative decision, such as a 
notice of assessment, denial of refund, or an adverse 
ruling, prior to filing suit under HRS § 40 –35 is 
consistent with HRS § 632 –1 (1993), which requires an 
“actual controvers y” in order to confer jurisdiction and 
provides that “declaratory relief may not be obtained ... 
in any controversy with respect to taxes[.] ” 
92 Hawaiʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545.  We concluded that “[t]he 
need to avoid premature adjudication supports a definition of 
‘dispute’  that requires more than a ‘difference of opinion ’  as 
to policy.” 92 Hawai ʻi at 612, 994 P.2d at 544. In order for a 
34   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
claimant to properly make a payment under protest and bring an 
action under HRS § 40 -35, 
there must be an actual dispute  .  . . where an 
administrative decision has not been formalized, simply 
arguing that there is a “dispute”  or “difference of 
opinion”  with Department policy and paying taxes under 
protest does not present an actual dispute .  
Grace II , 92 Hawaiʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545 (emphasis added) . 
In the tax court, Hawaiian specifically argued that HRS § 
40-35 jurisdiction existed based on the inter-office memorandum, 
the September email between the auditor and Boeing, and the May 
2021 letter, and the tax court ruled that none of these 
constituted the requisite formal administrative decision. The 
tax court did not , however, address the May 21, 2021 NOPA, 
although it was referenced in the complaint and included in the 
record. But the issue of subject matter jurisdiction is one of 
law and the court m ay consider not just the pleadings, but also 
the record. 
In Grace II , we said that “permitting Grace to demand that 
the Director resolve the question whether Grace is entitled to 
the refund requested by paying under protest before an audit is 
completed or any formal decision is made, in effect grants Grace 
declaratory relief in contravention of HRS § 632 -1.” 92 Hawaiʻi 
at 613, 994 P.2d at 545. Despite the obvious differences with 
the facts of this case, t he Department takes the position that 
Grace II means Hawaiian ’s payment could not be made until after 
35   
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
       ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
issuance of the final notice of assessment to qualify as a HRS § 
40-35 payment under protest. It argues Hawaiian ’s payment was 
therefore premature and deprived the tax appeal court of HRS § 
40-35 subject matter jurisdiction . It also asserts that 
Hawaiian had the option of filing an appeal after the final 
assessmen t, but missed th at deadline .13 Therefore, the 
Department takes the position that Hawaiian has no procedural 
remedy.14 
We disagree with the Department.  Here, we need not decide 
whether the May 21, 2021 letter could also have constituted the 
required formal administrative decision because the May 21, 2021 
NOPA did, even if  it  was to be followed by a final assessment.  
Contrary to the Department’s position, Grace II  supports this 
holding.  The payment under protest there was made after the 
Department only gave notice it would be conducting an audit. 
Here, the audit had been completed. Also, Judge Acoba’s dissent 
in Grace I  indicated  there was no “actual dispute” because there 
had been “no demand” and “no determination of tax liability.”   
Grace I, 92 Hawaiʻi at 674, 994 P.2d at 606.   Here, the NOPA 
13 It was also pointed out a t oral argument , however, that while the State 
could owe interest of four percent on taxes refunded to taxpayers, taxpayers 
could owe eight percent interest on amounts due, assessable from the date of 
the original return. By making its payment under protest when it did, it 
appears Hawaiian halted the accrual of the eight percent interest earlier 
than if it had waited for the final assessment, in the event its appeal was 
eventually denied. 
14 See also supra note 13. 
36   
    
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
contained a “demand” and a “determination of tax liability .” It 
even contained a payment voucher specifying the amount to pay, 
instructions on the method in which payment could be made, and 
to whom the check was to be made payable . 
The NOPA was a “formal administrative decision.” In this 
regard, addressing Hawaiian’s fourth question on certiorari, we 
agree that the Department’s communications were confusing. The 
TBOR serves to inform all taxpayers of their most important 
rights as taxpayers . The rights therein are “based on laws and 
. . . [the D epartment ’s] commitment to administer [Hawai ʻi’s] tax 
law in a fair and equitable manner.” Section VI of the TBOR, 
quoted above, indicates the NOPA “explains the basis for the 
assessment of taxes.” Although it also refers to a “right to 
request clarification or to object to the tax assessment with in 
30 days,” it also says that “the proposed tax assessment will 
become final after the expiration of 30 days from the mailing of 
the Proposed Notice of Assessment.” Moreover, Section VII of 
the TBOR, quoted above, clearly says that, “in lieu of filing an 
appeal,” a taxpayer can make a payment under protest “within 30 
days from the date the Final Notice of Assessment was mailed.” 
That is the deadline , suggesting that the payment under protest 
must be filed before that deadline. 
In addition, TIR 2002 -1 “summarizes statutory rights, 
obligations, and procedures, relating to the audit of net 
37   
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
    
 
   
  
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
income, general excise, and use tax returns by the [Department]  
which may result in the assessment of additional taxes; appeals 
from the assessment of taxes; claims for refund or credit; and 
payment to the State under protest .”  TIR 2002-1 also provides 
that the TIR is issued solely as a guide and is not intended to be complete.   Like the TBOR, TIR 2002-1 states:  
In lieu of filing an appeal or if an appeal is not filed 
with the board of review or tax appeal court within thirty 
days of the date when the notice of assessment was mailed, 
section 40 -35, HRS, allows the taxpayer to pay under 
protest disputed portions of the assessment. A taxpayer 
may recover those taxes paid under protest if an action for 
recovery is commenced in the tax appeal court within thirty 
days from the date of the payment and the taxpayer prevails 
in that action. If no suit or proceeding is br ought within 
thirty days of the payment, the taxes paid under protest 
become a government realization. 
Hence, the NOPA constitutes a “tax assessment,” even though 
a taxpayer need not make payment until after the final 
assessment . A NOPA qualifie s as a “final administrative 
decision” required by Grace II to invoke HRS § 40-35 
jurisdiction. 
B. Grace II allows lower courts to determine whether an 
official agency communication is an “adverse ruling” 
constituting a “formal administrative decision” for 
HRS § 40-35 jurisdiction purposes 
In its second issue on certiorari, Hawaiian argues Grace II 
allowed lower courts to determine whether an official agency 
communication is an “adverse ruling.” This appears to be in 
reference to the ICA’s statement in its SDO that this court in 
Grace II said, “where an administrative decision has not been 
38   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
    
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
formalized, simply arguing that there is a ‘dispute’ or 
‘difference of opinion ’ with [Tax] Department policy and paying 
taxes under protest does not present an actual dispute under HRS 
§ 40-35.” 92 Hawaiʻi at 612, 994 P.2d at 54 4. Grace II does, 
however, allow courts to determine whether there was an “actual 
dispute.” By ruling that a NOPA constitute s a “formal 
administrative decision ” for HRS § 40-35 purposes, we do not 
intend to preclude other decisio ns that could also qualify. 
C. Pursuant to Grace II , the “actual dispute requirement ” of 
HRS § 40-35 is jurisdictional 
In its third question on certiorari, H awaiian argues that 
the administrative exhaustion set forth in the language of HRS 
§ 40-35 and in Grace II should be seen as “nonjurisdictional 
procedural requirements to promote the orderly progress of 
litigation.” We have explained that the distinction between 
time limit rules that are “claim -processing” and 
“jurisdictional” are as follows: 
The [U.S.] Supreme Court emphasized that only Congress may 
determine a lower federal court ’s subject- matter jurisdiction  . . 
.  [W]hen appeals are not “prosecuted in the manner directed, 
within the time limited by the acts of Congress, it must be 
dismissed for want of jurisdiction.”  As such, the Court stated 
that the rules regarding time constraints that are derived from statutes specifically limiting a court ’s jurisdiction are 
considered “jurisdictional.”  “Claim-processing” rules related to 
time restrictions, on the other hand, are “court -promulgated” and 
adopted by the Court for the orderly transaction of business.  
Such rules are not derived from statutory time constraints 
specifically limiting jurisdiction, and can be relaxed at the 
Court’s discretion.  
The time constraints in FRAP Rule 4(a)(6) were declared 
“jurisdictional” because they are set forth by statute in 28 
39   
  
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
U.S.C. § 2107(c), which limits the amount of time federal 
district courts can extend the notice of appeal period . 
Cabral v. State, 127 Hawaiʻi 175, 182, 277 P.3d 269, 276 (2012)  
(emphasis added).   Hawaiian primarily cites two cases for its 
position,  Boechler  and Aloha Motors.  
In Boechler, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the deadline 
to petition the tax court for a review of collection due process 
determination was not jurisdictional because the underlying 
statute did not explicitly so provide, and  the Court  remanded to 
determine whether the plaintiff was entitled to equitable relief. 596 U.S. at 206, 211. The Court stated:  
Jurisdictional requirements mark the bounds of a “court’s 
adjudicatory authority.”  Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 
455 (2004).  Yet not all procedural requirements fit that 
bill.  Many simply instruct “parties [to] take certain 
procedural steps at certain specified times” without 
conditioning a court’s authority to hear the case on 
compliance with those steps.  Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 
U.S. 428, 435 (2011). . . . To that end, we treat a procedural requirement as jurisdictional only if Congress 
“clearly states” that it is.   Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 
U.S. 500, 515 (2006).  Congress need not “incant magic 
words,” Auburn  [Sebelius v. Auburn Regional Medical 
Center], 568 U.S.  [145], at 153, but the “traditional tools 
of statutory construction must plainly show that Congress imbued a procedural bar with jurisdictional consequences,” 
United States v. Kwai Fun Wong, 575 U.S. 402, 410 (2015).  
596 U.S. at 203 (cleaned up) . The Court also rejected the 
commissioner’s argument related to that case that there was “a 
long line of Supreme Court decisions left undisturbed by 
Congress ” that represented a “ clear indication that a 
requirement is jurisdictional .” Boechler , 596 U.S. at 208 
(cleaned up)(citations omitted). 
40   
  
 
  
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
In Aloha Motors, the taxpayer, Aloha Motors, a franchised 
motor vehicle dealer, sought a refund of wholesale use taxes it 
mistakenly paid over several years. 69 Haw. at 516, 750 P.2d at 
82. Upon realizing the error, Aloha Motors asked for a refund 
for tax payments occurring from 1968 to 1981. Id.   The tax 
director agreed to return the payments occurring in 1978 to 1981, but refused to refund more,  arguing that Aloha Motors 
neglected to seek repayment within three years after the payment 
of the tax as established by HRS §  237-40(d), so those claims 
were barred. 69 Haw.  at 517, 750 P.2d at 83.   We concluded  that 
although Aloha Motors was at fault for failing to follow the 
required steps, the tax appeal court was not divested of 
jurisdiction to entertain an action contesting the tax 
director’s decision. 69 Haw.  at 520, 750 P.2d at 84. 
Accordingly, because no statutory language supported  the 
Department’s position on the tax appeal court ’s alleged lack of 
jurisdiction, we held  that the tax appeal court possessed the 
authority to review the merits of that  use tax matter.   Id.  at 
520, 750 P.2d at 85. But we also held that there was no 
discovery tolling for tax statutes and ruled that the statute of 
limitations in HRS §  237-40(d) barred Aloha Motors’ claim .   Id.   
Aloha Motors does not support Hawaiian’s argument that the 
requirements in HRS § 40-35 are nonjurisdictional, as we 
ultimately held there was jurisdiction in that case. It further 
41   
  
   
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
involved a statute of limitation that failed to make explicitly 
clear any jurisdictional requirements .15 
Granted, on its face, HRS §  40-35 does not clearly state 
that it contains a jurisdictional requirement. HRS §  40-35 says  
that “disputed  portions of money” may be paid under protest but  
does not provide that without such a “dispute” that the tax 
appeal court would not have jurisdiction, nor does the statute 
describe when a “dispute” occurs  to effectuate the tax appeal 
court’s jurisdiction . Grace I  and Grace II, however, discussed 
the legislative intent behind HRS § 40-35, and Grace II  has 
already decided this issue.  
As indicated in Grace I, the “any dispute d portion of” 
language in HRS § 40-35 was added in 1967, evidencing 
the gravamen of a protest payment is not merely a 
“difference[] of opinion ” between the taxpayer and the 
government, as was said when the statute was first enacted 
15HRS § 237-40(d) provides: 
(d) Refunds. No credit or refund shall be allowed for any 
tax imposed by this chapter, unless a claim for such credit 
or refund shall be filed as follows: 
(1) If an annual return is timely filed, or is filed 
within three years after the date prescribed for 
filing the annual return, then the credit or refund 
shall be claimed within three years after the date 
the annual return was filed or the date prescribed 
for filing the annual return, whichever is later. 
(2) If an annual return is not filed, or is filed 
more than three years after the date prescribed for 
filing the annual return, a claim for credit or 
refund shall be filed within: 
(A) Three years after the payment of the tax; 
or 
(B) Three years after the date prescribed for 
the filing of the annual return, whichever is 
later. 
42   
  
 
   
 
 
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
[in 1907], but some actual dispute which justifies payments 
to be segregated, and thus removed from governmental use 
pending judicial resolution of the controversy. 
92 Hawaiʻi at 674, 994 P.2d at 606 (Acoba , J., dissenting). 
Grace II then sought to effectuate HRS § 632 -1’s prohibition on 
declaratory relief actions “in any controversy with respect to 
taxes.” 92 Hawai ʻi at 613, 994 P.2d at 545.  We said that 
“permitting Grace to demand that the Director resolve the 
question whether Grace is entitled to the refund requested by 
paying under protest before an audit is completed or any formal 
decision is made, in effect grants Grace declaratory relief in 
contravention of HRS § 632 -1.” Id. 
Accordingly, although HRS §  40-35 does not explicitly 
provide that without a dispute, the tax appeal court is deprived 
of jurisdiction, Grace II  held that the “dispute” requirement 
set forth in HRS § 40-35 is indeed jurisdictional. Under the 
doctrine of stare decisis, we see no compelling justification to 
depart from precedent. See Ahn, 126 Hawaiʻi at 10, 265 P.3d at 
479.   Therefore, Hawaiian’s third question on certiorari lacks 
merit.  
V.  Conclusion  
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the tax court’s May 
16, 2022 (1) Order Granting Defendant Department of Taxation, 
State of Hawaii’s Motion To Dismiss Or, In The Alternative, 
Cross Motion for Summary Judgment Filed On December 10, 2021; 
43   
  
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
(2) Order Dismissing Plaintiff Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.’s Motion 
For Summary Judgment Filed on August 10, 2021; and (3) “Final 
Judgment Re: Order Granting Defendant Department of Taxation, 
State of Hawaii’s Motion To Dismiss Or, In The Alternative, 
Cross Motion for Summary Judgment Filed On December 10, 2021,” 
as well as the ICA’s April 18, 2024 Judgment on Appeal. We 
remand this matter to the tax court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion.    
Thomas Yamachika,    /s/ Mark E.  Recktenwald
for petitioner      
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
Mary Bahng Yokota  
(Nathan S.C. Chee,    /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
with  her on the briefs),  
for respondent     /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
 
      /s/ Vladimir P. Devens   
44 