 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I,
 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
LINCOLN PHILLIPS,
Respondent/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-12-0000020
 
30-SEP-2016 01:01 PM 
---o0o---
SCWC-12-0000020 

CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0000020; CR. NO. 08-1-1430) 
SEPTEMBER 30, 2016 

McKENNA AND POLLACK, JJ., AND CIRCUIT JUDGE NISHIMURA, IN PLACE
OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED, AND NAKAYAMA, J., CONCURRING AND
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) vacated the 
conviction of Lincoln Phillips for the attempted murder of his 
wife Tara Phillips and remanded the case for a new trial. In 
reaching this result, the ICA adopted an interpretation of the   
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
plain view doctrine that is contrary to this court’s prior 
decisions and the protections and limits of the rights 
guaranteed under Article I, Section 7 of the Hawaiʻ i 
Constitution. A proper application of these principles requires 
the reversal of the ICA’s judgment on appeal and affirmance of 
the trial court’s amended judgment of conviction. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Initial investigation 
In the early morning of September 3, 2008, police 
dispatch received a call from Lincoln Phillips summoning police to his home. Phillips told the operator that “when he came home 
he found injuries to his wife’s head.” Honolulu Fire Department 
(HFD) personnel, emergency medical technicians (EMT), and Officer Stanley Collins of the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
were the earliest first responders to arrive at Phillips’ house. 
HPD Officer Collins received the dispatch at about 
3:54 a.m. The officer “had no idea” of the identity of the 
victim or suspect. When Officer Collins arrived at the 
residence, he saw Phillips “in his garage area.” According to 
Officer Collins, Phillips seemed frantic and was “motioning [him] to come forward” into the “garage area.” Officer Collins 
understood the motioning to be “inviting me” and as an 
indication that “this is the place you should come, this is the 
- 2 ­  
 
                        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
place you should be.”1 Upon entering the garage, Officer Collins 
asked Phillips what happened. Phillips responded, “It’s my 
wife, it’s my wife,” and informed Officer Collins that his wife, 
Tara Phillips (Tara), was upstairs in the bedroom. While 
Phillips remained in the garage area, Officer Collins went 
upstairs and saw Tara lying on a bed being attended by members 
of the HFD. After spending “maybe a few seconds” upstairs, 
Officer Collins returned to the garage, where Phillips had remained, and Officer Collins “made contact with Phillips and 
tried to get him calm.” 
HPD Officer Robert Frank arrived at approximately 4:03 
a.m. and joined Officer Collins and Phillips in the garage. 
Officer Frank noted that Phillips “was sweating profusely, 
pacing back and forth.” Phillips told the officers that “he 
couldn’t sleep. So he got in his car, drove to the beach[] then 
[to] the park at the end of Fort Weaver Road, [and] stopped at 7 
Eleven.” When he “arrived home, [he] went upstairs and . . . found his wife bleeding from her head.” 
Officer Collins “tried to get [Phillips] calm” by 
opening the door of Tara’s vehicle and having him sit in the 
1 From this testimony, there is the clear indication that the
garage door was open when Officer Collins arrived. The fact that the garage
door was open when the police arrived is supported by Officer Collins’
testimony that Phillips told him “[t]hat he had left to go get something andwhen he returned home he found his garage door opened”, and by trial
testimony of an EMT that when he arrived at the scene “[i]nitially we seen
[sic] the garage open.” 
- 3 ­  
 
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
passenger seat. Officer Collins asked him what happened, and 
Phillips explained that “when he went upstairs initially he sat 
on the futon” and “the lights were out.” “When he heard his 
wife having difficulty breathing that’s when he turned on the 
lights and discovered her injuries.” 
Phillips said that the garage door was closed when he 
drove off early that morning and open when he returned home. 
Phillips explained that the garage door was defective: “it would close with the remote, but it would not open with the remote.” 
Phillips demonstrated the garage door remote to show the 
officers that it was defective. Phillips closed the garage door 
with the remote, and the officers “had to open it from the 
inside panel of the garage” with a wall switch. 
HPD Sergeant (Sgt.) Lloyd Keliinui arrived at 
Phillips’ residence at approximately 4:00 a.m. Sgt. Keliinui 
was told by other officers that Phillips had come home and had 
“found out that his wife had been assaulted.” Based on the information that “somebody came in” to the home, Sgt. Keliinui 
was concerned that there was “somebody out there unidentified, 
possibly roaming the neighborhood, with some kind of weapon.” 
Sgt. Keliinui “instructed some of the initial officers to canvas 
the area” and to “check for possible suspects or witnesses” and 
evidence. 
- 4 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HPD Officer John Tokunaga arrived at approximately 
4:12 a.m. Sgt. Keliinui instructed him to “check the area” “in 
the immediate vicinity of the residence” “for possible weapons 
that may have been used.” Sgt. Keliinui did not inform Officer 
Tokunaga of the general facts of the case. Officer Tokunaga did 
not know “what kind of possible weapons [he] was looking for.” 
He was looking for any “possible evidence that may have been 
related to the victim’s injuries.” He was not aware of “anyone in particular [that was] a suspect.” Officer Tokunaga did not 
find any weapon or other possible evidence that may have been 
related to Tara’s injuries outside of the residence. 
Sometime before 4:30 a.m., Officer Tokunaga observed a 
hammer “on a cooler” inside the garage, “on the left side of the 
garage as you enter.” 
Officer Tokunaga “believe[d] there was a 
spot of blood on top of the hammer,” which indicated that it was a “possible weapon.” Officer Tokunaga also observed “water on 
the handle area of the hammer” but not on the coolers. At the time Officer Tokunaga observed the hammer, Officers Frank and 
Collins were also in the garage with Phillips. Officer Tokunaga 
informed Sgt. Keliinui and Officer Corrine Rivera about the 
hammer that he had found. 
During the initial investigation, Phillips’ garage 
served as an impromptu center for the police response. Officer 
Collins was “going back and forth” from the garage, trying to 
- 5 ­  
 
                        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
keep Phillips “calm”; “EMS [was] arriving, and the sector 
sergeant [was] arriving”; and Officer Ahn was with Phillips in 
the garage. HPD officers “were coming in and out” of the 
garage, and “there was a lot of commotion going on because the 
garage had kind of been the central place of the investigation.” 
At some point during the “initial check of the 
residence” by the police, Officer Frank blew his nose into a 
napkin and “discarded it in the garbage can” that was “in the garage.”
2 Officer Frank lifted the lid of the garbage container 
“about 45 degrees” to discard the napkin, and observed rolled up mesh clothing among discarded food boxes inside the garbage 
container. The clothes were “just sitting in the garbage 
container,” “on the same level” of the food boxes. Officer 
Frank did not “disturb the contents of that trash can at all.” 
Because the clothing “was rolled up,” Officer Frank did not 
notice anything unusual about the clothes. Officer Frank 
informed Sgt. Keliinui about the clothing “when [he] got the chance to see him.” 
HPD Officer Dennis Ahn arrived at approximately 4:30 
a.m. and entered the open garage where he observed Officer 
Collins, Sgt. Keliinui, and Phillips. Officer Collins 
2 Although not precisely described by the parties, photographs in
the record indicate that the “garbage can” is a common plastic garbage
container, apparently a 32- gallon variety. 
- 6 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instructed Officer Ahn to stay with Phillips, who “was the only 
witness at the time.” Officer Ahn was assigned to watch 
Phillips and help him “to just remain calm, and just to stay put 
until a detective would come and get a statement from him.” 
Later, Officer Ahn asked Phillips to move into the living room 
so that he would be more comfortable and could see Tara as she 
was being carried out, and because he was “obstructing the 
walkway between walking in the garage and into the home.” 
At approximately 5:15 a.m., Officer Ahn asked Phillips 
to accompany him “to the Kapolei station, because a detective would like to get his statement.” Officer Ahn informed Phillips 
“that he was not under arrest.” “Phillips was very cooperative. 
And he said yes.” Officer Ahn and Phillips arrived at the 
Kapolei Police Station at approximately 5:30 a.m. where Phillips 
was interviewed later that morning. At the end of the 
interview, Phillips “just want[ed] to go see [his] wife,” and he 
was permitted to leave the station. 
At approximately 6:05 a.m., Evidence Specialist 
Jasmina Eliza from the HPD Scientific Investigation Section arrived at Phillips’ home. She was directed to photograph and 
recover the hammer. Specialist Eliza recovered the hammer at 
approximately 9:35 a.m. At the same time, she also recovered a 
man’s shirt as well as a man’s pants from the trash can located 
in the garage. 
- 7 ­  
 
    
 
                     
  
   
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
At 12:25 p.m., HPD Detective Sheryl Sunia prepared an 
Affidavit in Support of a Search Warrant (Affidavit). In her 
Affidavit, Sunia requested a warrant allowing a search of, inter 
alia, Phillips’ residence and car, along with receptacles, bags, 
and containers found within.3 
Upon a finding that there was probable cause to 
believe that “evidence of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree 
. . . and/or Burglary in the First Degree” was present, a district court judge issued a search warrant for Phillips’ car 
and residence and “all closed compartments and/or containers” 
therein at approximately 7:45 p.m. that evening. Among other 
items, the warrant allowed HPD officers to search Phillips’ 
residence for “[a] plastic garbage can, including its contents, 
located in the enclosed garage” as well as “all items of 
evidence, including, but not limited to . . . articles of 
clothing . . . [and] tools.” 
B. Circuit Court 
On September 10, 2008, Phillips was indicted on the 
charge of attempted murder in the second degree in violation of 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500,
4 707-701.5,5 and 706­
3 A detailed summary of the factual assertions made in Sunia’s
Affidavit is set forth in the Discussion section, see infra Part III.C. 
4 HRS § 705- 500 (1993) states in relevant part the following: 
(. . .continued)  
- 8 ­  
 
    
 
                                                                  
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
656.6 Phillips pleaded not guilty to the charge on September 15, 
2008, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). 
1. Motion to Suppress 
On April 24, 2009, Phillips filed a Motion to Suppress 
Evidence and Statements (motion).7 Phillips sought to suppress 
(. . .continued) 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if the
person:(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances were as the 
person believes them to be; or
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the circumstances 
as the person believes them to be, constitutes a substantialstep in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the
person’s commission of the crime.
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of the crime, a
person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if, acting with the state
of mind required to establish liability with respect to the attendantcircumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the person
intentionally engages in conduct which is a substantial step in a course of 
conduct intended or known to cause such a result. 
5 HRS § 707- 701.5 (1993) states as follows: 
(1) Except as provided in section 707- 701, a person commits the offense 
of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or knowingly
causes the death of another person.
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which the defendant
shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in section 706- 656. 
6 HRS § 706- 656 (Supp. 1996) states in relevant part as follows: 
(1) Persons eighteen years of age or over at the time of the offense 
who are convicted of first degree murder or first degree attempted murder
shall be sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. 
. . . . 
(2) Except as provided in section 706- 657, pertaining to enhanced 
sentence for second degree murder, persons convicted of second degree murder
and attempted second degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment
with possibility of parole. The minimum length of imprisonment shall be
determined by the Hawaii paroling authority; provided that persons who are
repeat offenders under section 706- 606.5 shall serve at least the applicable 
mandatory minimum term of imprisonment. 
7 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over the hearing on the
motion and the subsequent trial. 
- 9 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
from admission into evidence the hammer recovered from his 
garage and a gray “men’s shirt with orange piping and gray men’s 
shorts with blue lateral stripes,” recovered from a trash can 
located in his garage. Phillips asserted that the hammer and 
the clothing “were recovered without consent and without a 
warrant,” in violation of his state and federal constitutional 
rights. 
In his argument to the court on the motion, defense 
counsel acknowledged that “the hammer’s in plain view, there’s no dispute about that,” but argued that the HPD could not seize 
the hammer absent “exigent circumstances for the warrantless 
seizure.” Regarding the clothing, defense counsel argued that 
“whether or not . . . [it] was discovered inadvertently or was 
in plain view,” there was both “a search and a seizure problem,” 
particularly in light of the clothing being included as a basis 
for the search warrant. 
The State asserted that “[h]aving invited the police 
into his home to investigate a possible crime,” Phillips at best only had “a diminished privacy right” and, hence, could not 
complain “that the police were unlawfully in his home.” 
According to the State, it was “uncontroverted” that the hammer 
was discovered in plain view and that “the case law is clear,” 
under
 State v. Jenkins,  93 Hawaiʻ i 87, 997 P.2d 13 (2000), that 
if “an item is in plain view, [seizure] doesn’t violate a 
-10 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
person’s right[s].” The State argued that the clothes were 
admissible because “there was no search” when Officer Frank 
“opened the trash can,” threw the napkin in, and “saw the 
clothes” in “plain view.” The State maintained that, in the 
alternative, even if Officer Frank’s actions did constitute a 
search, the clothing was still admissible under the doctrine of 
inevitable discovery. The State further contended that even 
without the clothing, there was still probable cause for the search warrant because the “fact that a crime was committed in 
the house [was alone] enough for the search warrant.” 
On December 29, 2009, the circuit court issued its 
“Findings of Facts, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting in 
Part and Denying in Part Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Evidence 
and Statements.” Regarding the hammer, the circuit court found 
that when Officer Tokunaga was assigned to look for weapons, he 
“knew no other facts and had no suspects in mind.” The court 
concluded that Officer Tokunaga was “engaged in a lawful intrusion” when he “inadvertently observe[d]” the hammer. 
Because the blood on the hammer gave Officer Tokunaga probable 
cause to believe it was evidence of a crime, the hammer was 
lawfully seized under the plain view doctrine. 
Additionally, the circuit court concluded that the 
State had “carried its burden to show by clear and convincing 
evidence that the clothing found within the covered trash 
-11 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
container in the garage would inevitably have been discovered by 
lawful means” under the search warrant later obtained. The 
court reasoned that the search warrant was not constitutionally 
defective because “notwithstanding the search warrant 
affidavit[’s] reliance, in part, upon statements and items 
illegally obtained, the affidavit[] absent those statements and 
items contained sufficient basis upon which a district court 
judge could find probable cause to search for all items enumerated.” 
The motion was therefore denied as to the hammer and 
clothing discovered in Phillips’ garage. The court granted the 
motion, in part, with respect to certain statements Phillips 
made to HPD officers. 
2. The Trial 
The hammer and the clothing recovered from the garbage 
container were received into evidence at trial. Officer Frank identified his discarded tissue in State’s Exhibit 15, a 
photograph of the garbage can showing the appearance of the 
interior of the container when Officer Frank lifted its lid on 
the morning of September 3, 2008. Police witnesses provided 
testimony that Phillips had stated that he had placed the hammer “where it was found.” A witness stated that he saw Phillips 
wearing the clothing found in the garbage container the day 
before the assault. An expert witness identified the red 
-12 ­  
 
    
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
substance on the hammer and on the T-shirt as Tara’s blood 
through DNA analysis. 
In regard to Tara’s injuries, Dr. Cherylee Chang 
testified that Tara arrived at the hospital on the day of the 
attack in a coma. Tara was “unresponsive, not opening her 
eyes,” and had no motor response. Tara’s principal injury was a 
large laceration over the right side of her head. According to 
Dr. Chang, Tara was “at imminent risk of death” because of significant brain injuries; if she had not received emergency 
medical treatment, she would have died “in the field.” In order 
to save her life, Tara was placed into a medically induced coma. 
Tara’s mother testified that Tara was in the hospital 
in Honolulu for four months before being transferred to a 
Veterans Affairs (VA) hospital near Tampa, Florida. At the time 
Tara left Hawaiʻ i, Dr. Chang felt that Tara “was in such bad 
neurologic condition that it looked like she would be bed 
bound.” Tara’s mother testified that Tara was never able to 
live on her own after the attack and that she never regained any 
memory of her attack. Tara died in the Tampa, Florida VA hospital on April 19, 2010.
8 
8 The record does not contain any information regarding a discharge
from the Florida VA Hospital or indicate that Tara was cared for at home or
with a family member; as noted above, Tara’s mother testified that Tara died
in the Florida VA hospital.  There is, however, a potential inference from
the record that Tara was discharged from the Florida VA hospital four months
(. . .continued) 
-13 ­  
 
                                                                     
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The parties stipulated during trial that Tara’s “death 
was unrelated to the September 3, 2008 attack.” Phillips 
elected not to testify. In closing argument, Phillips’ counsel 
argued that there was insufficient evidence to convict Phillips 
of the charged offense. 
On June 16, 2011, the jury found Phillips guilty of 
attempted murder in the second degree. On August 29, 2011, the 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence was issued by the circuit court, sentencing Phillips to life imprisonment with the 
possibility of parole, with restitution to be determined at a 
subsequent proceeding. 
At the restitution hearing, the State requested that 
Tara’s mother be reimbursed for funeral and related expenses of 
$6,530. Phillips argued that he should not be liable for any 
additional payment because he had made “very large payments for 
a couple years to” Tara’s mother; Tara died well over a year 
after the attack; and there was no evidence presented or doctor’s testimony regarding the cause of death. In response, 
the circuit court noted that Tara was in a coma, suffered from 
head injuries, had to be taken to a Florida nursing home, and 
would not have died but for Phillips’ conduct. Following the 
(. . .continued) 
before her death, with the further inference that Tara was presumably
readmitted before her death. 
-14 ­  
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
restitution hearing, the court issued an Amended Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence, which ordered Phillips to pay $6,530 in 
restitution. 
On January 20, 2012, Phillips filed a timely notice of 
appeal from the amended judgment of conviction. 
C. Intermediate Court of Appeals 
Phillips contended to the ICA that his rights under 
the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
Article I, Section 7 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution were violated 
when the circuit court denied his motion to suppress. Phillips 
argued that the circuit court erred in applying the plain view 
doctrine to the discovery of the hammer and in concluding that 
the State had presented clear and convincing evidence that the 
clothing was admissible under the inevitable discovery exception 
to the exclusionary rule. Finally, Phillips argued that the 
circuit court erred in assessing $6,530 in restitution. 
1. The Hammer 
Phillips asserted that the plain view doctrine was 
inapplicable to the seizure of the hammer, and he argued that the circuit court should have instead applied the open view doctrine. Phillips acknowledged that there “was nothing 
intrusive about Officer Tokunaga’s vantage point because he was 
permitted to be in [Phillips’] garage by [Phillips] himself.” 
Officer Tokunaga viewed the hammer from a “public vantage 
-15 ­  
 
    
 
                     
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
point,” and therefore, “the plain view doctrine should not be 
applied.” “Absent a warrant [or] exigent circumstances at the 
time of its seizure, since the hammer was recovered from a 
constitutionally-protected location, evidence of the hammer 
should have been suppressed under the open view doctrine.” 
Phillips argued in the alternative that, under the plain view 
doctrine, the circuit court should have suppressed the evidence 
because the discovery was not inadvertent. 
In its Answering Brief, the State argued that 
“discovery and seizure of the hammer was lawful under the ‘plain view’ exception to the warrant requirement.” The State 
maintained that Officer “Tokunaga’s observation of the hammer 
with a stain that resembled blood in the garage of the residence 
was an ‘inadvertent discovery,’” because an inadvertent 
discovery is one in which police officers do not “know in 
advance the location of certain evidence and intend to seize it, 
relying on the plain view doctrine only as a pretext.” The State argued: 
Officer Tokunaga’ s discovery of the hammer was inadvertent. 
Here, Defendant had no reasonable expectation of privacy in
his garage during a lawful investigation into thecircumstances surrounding Tara’ s injuries initiated by 
Defendant’ s 911 call to the police. The police officers 
did not anticipate the discovery of the evidence until
Officer Tokunaga actually observed the hammer.
[9]    
9 The State acknowledged that “although the United States Supreme
Court has eliminated inadvertent discovery as a requirement of the ‘plain
view’ exception, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court has declined” to eliminate that
(. . .continued) 
-16 ­  
 
                                                                     
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The State contended that the police did not know in advance that 
the evidence would be there; therefore, the observation of the 
hammer was an inadvertent discovery, and the circuit court 
properly admitted the hammer into evidence. 
In his Reply, Phillips asserted that “both sides have 
conceded that the issue boils down to whether Officer Tokunaga’s 
discovery of the hammer was ‘inadvertent.’” Phillips argued 
that discovery of the hammer was not inadvertent just because “the police did not know in advance that the evidence would be 
there.” Rather, Phillips maintained that when Officer Tokunaga 
discovered the hammer, he “was specifically looking for evidence 
related to the attack on the complainant.” 
Phillips contended that “police investigation of a 
crime or [his] house being established as a crime scene” does 
not constitute “exigent circumstances such that the police could 
violate [his] constitutional rights.” He did not have an 
“affirmative duty . . . to declare or establish his constitutional right to privacy in his own home.” Phillips 
argued that there “was no evidence or testimony that established 
exigent circumstances justifying seizure of the hammer. To the 
(. . .continued) 
requirement in order to prevent “pretextual [A]rticle 1, Section 7 activity.”
While claiming that the discovery was inadvertent, the State alternatively“urge[d the] appellate court to reconsider Meyer  and hold that ‘inadvertent 
discovery’ is not a requirement for the ‘plain view’ exception to the warrantrequirement.”  
-17 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
contrary, the police could have quite easily secured the 
residence and obtained a warrant.” 
2. The Clothing 
Phillips declared that the circuit court did not 
conduct an “analysis under the plain view doctrine to attempt to justify the seizure of the clothing.” According to Phillips, 
“the court rejected any application of the plain view doctrine 
and instead justified the seizure of the clothing under the 
doctrine of inevitable discovery.” 
Phillips contested the circuit court’s finding “that 
the search warrant would still have been issued even without 
information of the illegally obtained evidence.” Rather, 
Phillips argued, the circuit court improperly concluded that the 
search warrant would have been issued because “the court fail[ed] to cite to any findings of fact in support of this 
contention.” Phillips contended that his position was bolstered 
by the fact that “despite all of the illegally-obtained evidence 
and statements, the police still did not feel that probable 
cause existed to arrest [him] after his interview.” 
Phillips also argued that, even if the search warrant 
would hypothetically have issued, the State did not show that the clothing would have still been there when the search warrant 
was executed. Phillips maintained that, while he did not mean 
to suggest he had “a right to discard or destroy evidence,” the 
-18 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
lower court improperly “concluded that the State demonstrated by 
clear and convincing evidence that [Phillips] was incapable of 
retrieving and discarding the clothing from the garbage can” 
before the search warrant was executed at 7:45 p.m. 
The State countered that “the attempted murder of 
Tara” in the house and the hammer “found in the garage [with] a 
stain that resembled blood on it” constituted “sufficient 
probable cause to issue the warrant.” The State contended that Phillips could not have removed evidence from his house because, 
as noted in the Affidavit in Support of Search Warrant, “the 
vehicle and residence were being secured by the presence of 
police units on scene.” The State therefore maintained that 
“the circuit court was correct in concluding that ‘the clothing 
. . . would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means.’” 
Phillips replied that because “three major bases of 
the warrant application [were] invalid”--the hammer, the clothes 
and much of Phillips’ statements to the police--“it cannot be assumed that the warrant [was properly] issued or that it would 
have specified [the trash can] to be searched.” Phillips 
maintained that even “if there did exist sufficient probable 
cause to issue the search warrant, the State did not show by 
clear and convincing evidence that the clothing recovered from 
[Phillips’] home would still have been there.” The warrant was 
not executed until “approximately sixteen hours later,” and 
-19 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
there “was no testimony regarding whether the police would have 
let [Phillips] back into his house after his release from 
custody.” 
3. Restitution 
Phillips argued that because the parties stipulated 
that Tara’s death was “unrelated to the September 3, 2008 attack . . . it must be accepted as fact.” Phillips maintained that 
“Tara died a full eighteen months after the attack.” Phillips 
argued that “[t]he record was completely devoid of any evidence 
or testimony that her death was the result of the September 3, 
2008 attack on her”; therefore, the circuit court erred when it 
ordered him to pay restitution. 
The State responded that the circuit court correctly 
recognized that “Tara didn’t recover from the injuries she sustained as a result of Defendant’s attack upon her,” “was in a 
coma and . . . had to be taken to a Florida nursing home, and 
there died . . . and would not have died but for Defendant’s 
conduct.” The State contended that the circuit court properly 
concluded that there was a nexus between Phillips’ conduct and 
Tara’s death, and therefore, it “did not err by ordering 
Defendant to pay restitution.” 
In his Reply, Phillips argued that the circuit court 
“did not rely on any evidence to overcome the stipulated fact that the complainant’s death had nothing to do with the attack 
-20 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
on her.” Because the “conclusions by the court did not come 
from any evidence -- testimonial or otherwise”--Phillips argued 
that he had “no opportunity to challenge the court’s findings 
through traditional methods of cross examination or lack of 
foundation,” and therefore, the order of restitution was not 
proper. 
4. Summary Disposition Order 
On August 30, 2013, the ICA issued a Summary 
Disposition Order (SDO). The ICA focused on the “inadvertent discovery” requirement for a “legitimate plain view 
observation.” In determining the meaning of “inadvertent,” the 
ICA relied upon a dictionary definition of inadvertent as 
“unintentional.” The ICA noted that Officer Tokunaga’s 
supervisor instructed him “to search the premises for the weapon used in the attack” on Tara. “A warrant certainly could have 
been obtained to search the premises given that an attempted 
murder appeared to have taken place there.” Thus, the ICA 
concluded that “the search and discovery of the hammer were 
certainly intentional” and, thus, could not “be described as 
inadvertent.” The ICA held that “the intentional search and 
seizure of the hammer under the plain view doctrine was not valid” and that “the circuit court erred in not suppressing the 
evidence of the hammer.” The ICA concluded that the issues 
-21 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relating to the clothes and restitution were moot, vacated 
Phillips’ conviction, and remanded the case for a new trial. 
The dissent to the ICA opinion “agree[d] that the 
Circuit Court erred in its application of the plain view 
doctrine, but only because . . . it was mistaken to apply the 
doctrine at all.” The dissent contended that “Phillips 
impliedly consented to a routine investigation into the 
circumstances of the assault, and the seizure of the hammer was thereby justified.” 
The dissent reasoned that if the inadvertency 
requirement was held “to equate to intentionality, then, 
logically, the plain view doctrine can never apply to a seizure 
of evidence that is discovered during a search intended 
precisely to turn up evidence of the sort discovered.” The 
dissent nevertheless avoided “the use of the plain view doctrine 
entirely” and used implied consent as the “starting point for 
[the] analysis.” The dissent “would rule that Phillips impliedly consented to [the] investigation” when he “called 911 
to report that his wife was attacked, and hastened responding 
officers into his home.” And “such consent was valid until such 
time as the initial investigation ceased; he revoked, or limited 
the scope of, that consent; or he became a suspect.” The 
dissent noted that “Phillips never evinced any desire to limit 
-22 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the scope of police activity” and “seemed intent on facilitating 
the investigation.” 
The dissent concluded that the facts provided in 
Detective Sunia’s Affidavit, including the lawfully discovered 
hammer, established probable cause for a search warrant without 
the inclusion of the clothes discovered by Officer Frank. 
Further, “[t]he evidence in the record clearly and convincingly 
establishes that the authorities would not have permitted Phillips to re-enter his house -- a crime scene -- to dispose of 
anything therein.” Thus, in the dissent’s view, the circuit 
court was correct in determining that the clothing would 
inevitably have been discovered pursuant to the execution of the 
search warrant. 
The dissent also would have affirmed the circuit 
court’s award of restitution, based on the evidence establishing 
that Tara suffered head injuries, was in a coma after the 
attack, and later had to be put in a nursing home where she eventually died. Further, the dissent pointed to evidence 
presented to the circuit court regarding the lethality of her 
injuries in concluding that Phillips’ responsibility for his 
conduct was not extinguished. 
-23 ­  
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
D. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
1. The hammer 
The State argues that the ICA “gravely erred in 
holding the circuit court was wrong by not suppressing the 
evidence of the hammer.” The State maintains that the search 
and seizure of the hammer was legitimate under the implied 
consent theory, as described by the ICA dissent. Alternatively, 
the State argues that the seizure of the hammer was legitimate 
under the plain view doctrine because the police “did not anticipate discovery of the evidence until Officer Tokunaga 
actually discovered the hammer”; thus, the “observation of the 
hammer was an ‘inadvertent discovery.’” The State additionally 
requests this court to “hold that inadvertent discovery is not a 
requirement for the plain view exception to the warrant 
requirement.” 
In his Response, Phillips contends that the ICA “did 
not gravely err in concluding the circuit court was wrong by not 
suppressing evidence of the hammer.” Phillips argues that the seizure of the hammer was improper because Phillips “did not 
impliedly consent to a search,” and implied consent was not 
established in the evidentiary record because it “was never a 
consideration, never argued[,] and never even mentioned at the 
hearings on the motion to suppress.” To decide this case on 
implied consent, when relevant facts and testimony were not 
-24 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
developed below, “would implicate [Phillips’] due process right 
to confront the witnesses with respect to the issue of implied 
consent.” Phillips also echoed the ICA’s holding that “the 
discovery of the hammer was not inadvertent because Officer 
Tokunaga was ordered to search the premises,” and therefore, 
“the search and seizure of the hammer was unconstitutional.” 
2. The clothing 
The State contends that the ICA “gravely erred in 
concluding that respondent’s other points on appeal are moot, and thereby fail[ing] to render a decision with regard to the 
evidence of clothing.” The State maintains that “because the 
circuit court’s ruling with regard to the clothing involves an 
evidentiary issue, it should have been addressed by the ICA 
majority before it remanded the case for a new trial.” The State also asserts that “the circuit court correctly applied the 
inevitable discovery doctrine” in admitting the clothing into 
evidence. 
In his Response, Phillips agrees with the State that 
“the ICA majority gravely erred in concluding [Phillips’] other 
points on appeal are moot,” but he argues that “this court 
should suppress evidence of the clothing and vacate the circuit court’s order of restitution.” Phillips submits that “the State 
did not present clear and convincing evidence that [the 
clothing] would have been inevitably discovered,” maintaining 
-25 ­  
 
    
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
both that the warrant may not have issued absent the hammer and 
that the State failed to show that the clothing would have 
remained in the garbage container until the warrant was 
executed. 
3. Restitution 
The State urges affirmance of the circuit court’s 
order of restitution because there is “a sufficient nexus for the circuit court to order restitution for Tara’s funeral 
expenses.” 
Phillips responds that the circuit court improperly 
awarded restitution because the circuit court “did not rely on 
any evidence to overcome the stipulated fact that the 
complainant’s death had nothing to do with the attack on her.” 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. Police entry into Phillips’ garage 
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
protects the “right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and 
seizures” by the government. Similarly, article I, section 7 of 
the Hawai‘ i Constitution provides that the “right of the people 
to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects 
against unreasonable searches, seizures and invasions of privacy 
shall not be violated.” 
-26 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
It is well established that warrantless searches and 
seizures of items within a constitutionally protected area are 
“presumptively unreasonable unless there is both probable cause 
and a legally recognized exception to the warrant requirement.” 
State v. Bonnell , 75 Haw. 124, 137, 856 P.2d 1265, 1273 (1993). 
However, “before the issue of the ‘reasonableness’ of the 
activity is confronted, it must first be determined whether the 
activity did, in fact, constitute a search and seizure within 
the scope of the Fourth Amendment” and the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  
State v. Kaaheena, 59 Hawai‘ i 23, 28, 575 P.2d 462, 466 (1978) 
(emphases added) (quoting Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 
351 (1967)). This is because the Fourth Amendment and article 
I, section 7 do not apply unless there has been a “search” or a 
“seizure.” 1 Wayne R. Lafave, Search & Seizure § 2.1 (5th ed. 2013) (“The words ‘searches and seizures,’ . . . are terms of 
limitation. Law enforcement practices [are not subject to the 
Fourth Amendment] unless they are either ‘searches’ or 
‘seizures.’” (quoting Anthony G. Amsterdam, Perspectives on the 
Fourth Amendment, 58 Minn. L. Rev. 349 (1974))). “[T]he Fourth 
Amendment protects people, not places. What a person knowingly 
exposes to the public, even in his own home or office, is not a 
subject of Fourth Amendment protection.” State v. Stachler, 58 
Haw. 412, 416, 570 P.2d 1323, 1326 (1977) (emphases added) 
(quoting 
Katz, 389 U.S. at 351). 
-27 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
To determine whether a police entry constitutes a 
“search” within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment and the 
Hawai‘i Constitution, two tests have emerged: (1) the “Katz 
reasonable expectation of privacy test,” State v. Kender,  60 
Haw. 301, 303, 588 P.2d 447, 449 (1978), and (2) the 
Jones/Jardines trespass-intrusion test, Florida v. Jardines, 133 
S. Ct. 1409 (2013); United States v. Jones, 132 S. Ct. 945 
(2012). 
The Katz doctrine provides that only government 
intrusions into areas, objects, or activities in which an 
individual has exhibited a “reasonable expectation of privacy” 
are searches subject to the protections of the Fourth Amendment. Katz, 389 U.S. at 360 (Harlan, J., concurring). To determine 
whether a person’s expectation of privacy is reasonable, “there 
is a twofold requirement, first that a person . . . exhibited an 
actual (subjective) expectation of privacy and, second, that the 
expectation be one that society is prepared to recognize as 
[objectively] ‘reasonable.’” Id. at 361 (Harlan, J., 
concurring); Stachler, 58 Hawai‘ i at 416, 570 P.2d at 1326.  
Of recent vintage is the 
Jones/Jardines trespass-
intrusion test. Jones and Jardines recognized a trespass-
intrusion test based on the property-based understanding of 
Fourth Amendment search and seizure jurisprudence. What unites 
Jones
 and Jardines is the bedrock principle that the government 
-28 ­  
 
    
                     
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
cannot trespass or physically intrude into a constitutionally 
protected area for the purpose of gaining evidence without 
complying with the strictures of the Fourth Amendment. See 
Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 950—951; Jardines,
 133 S. Ct. at 1414—17. 
Under the  Jones/Jardines trespass-intrusion test, the first 
question is whether there is a trespass or physical intrusion to persons, houses, papers, or effects. A physical intrusion is 
the act of “entering without permission.” 
Black’s Law 
Dictionary  951 (10th ed. 2014). 
Second, it must be determined 
whether the underlying purpose of the police, objectively examined and at the time of the trespass or physical intrusion, 
is to gather evidence. See Jardines, 133 S. Ct. at 1415—17. 
Once both requisites are satisfied, a search under the Jones/Jardines trespass-intrusion test has occurred. See Jones, 
132 S. Ct. at 951 (explaining that a search occurs where there is a “[t]respass . . . conjoined with that what was present 
here: an attempt to find something or to obtain information”). The inquiry then shifts to whether there is an applicable 
exception to the warrant requirement that would allow the 
otherwise unauthorized governmental activity. See Jardines, 133 
S. Ct. at 1415—17; Jones
, 132 S. Ct. at 951—53.10 
10  The Jones/Jardines  trespass- intrusion test and the Katz 
reasonable- expectation test are alternative tests.  See  Jardines, 133 S. Ct. 
at 1418 (Kagan, J., concurring). Hence, in cases where a Fourth Amendment
search occurred under one of the tests, there is no need to engage in an
(. . .continued) 
-29 ­  
 
    
 
 
                                                                  
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1. There was no search under the Katz reasonable expectation
of privacy test 
As stated, under Katz, to determine whether a person’s 
expectation of privacy is reasonable, a person must exhibit an 
actual (subjective) expectation of privacy, and that expectation 
must be one that society is prepared to recognize as objectively 
reasonable. 
a. Subjective expectation of privacy 
Turning first to the subjective prong, the 
determination of whether or a person “exhibited an actual 
expectation of privacy,” State v. Texeira, 62 Haw. 44, 48, 609 
P.2d 131, 134 (1980), is through a fact-specific process, 
“considering all factors on a case-by-case basis,” 
State v. 
Ward, 62 Haw. 509, 515, 617 P.2d 568, 572 (1980). Here, Phillips called the 911 operator and requested the police and 
ambulance be sent to his home because Tara had been assaulted 
and was seriously injured. When police arrived, the garage door 
was open and the interior of the garage was exposed to public 
(. . .continued) 
inquiry under the other test. See  Jardines , 133 S. Ct. at 1417 (declining to 
use the
 Katz  test because the approach that the Court announced in Jones  was 
found applicable). Conversely, where no Fourth Amendment search is found
under one of the tests, the inquiry does not stop there, and the court must
determine whether a search occurred under the other test. See  Jones, 132 S.
Ct. at 953 (stating that where there is no search under the Jones/ Jardines  
test, such as in “[s]ituations involving merely the transmission ofelectronic signals 
without trespass,” a Katz analysis must be conducted 
(emphasis added)). 
-30 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
view, including to the police officers who responded to the 
scene. Further, Phillips motioned from within the garage for 
the responding officer to join him inside. The officer 
described Phillips’ gesture as “[m]ore or less inviting me that, 
yeah, this is the place you should come, this is the place you 
should be.” Phillips did not contest that his intent was to 
invite the officer into the garage. 
The record also does not contain any actions or 
statements by Phillips that would indicate that he expected the garage area to remain private. To the contrary, until leaving 
to go to the police station later that morning, Phillips 
remained with officers of the HPD, primarily in the garage area. 
Phillips has not disputed his lack of a subjective expectation 
of privacy at any point during this case. Phillips acknowledged 
this point at the hearing on the motion to suppress, stating 
that the police were in the garage “because, you know, 
[Phillips] had called 911 and they were -- they had a right to be there at the time.” Phillips also conceded this to the ICA, 
stating that “[t]here was nothing intrusive about Officer 
Tokunaga’s vantage point because he was permitted to be in 
[Phillips’] garage by [Phillips] himself” and that Officer 
Tokunaga “was allowed to be in [Phillips’] garage.” 
In sum, Phillips did not exhibit an actual 
(subjective) expectation of privacy regarding the presence of 
-31 ­  
 
    
                     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
police in his garage for the following reasons: Phillips 
requested the 911 operator to send the police to his home 
because Tara had been assaulted; when the police arrived, the 
garage door was open and the interior of the garage was exposed 
to public view; Phillips invited the police officers to enter 
the garage; and the totality of his conduct while the police 
were present.11    
b. Objective expectation of privacy 
Even if Phillips had exhibited an actual expectation 
of privacy, it “must be one that society would recognize as 
objectively reasonable” in order for the constitutional 
protections against unreasonable searches and seizures to 
11 The concurring and dissenting opinion (dissent) makes the
accusation that our analysis places on “the defendant . . . an affirmative 
obligation to establish that he or she did not consent to a search of a
constitutionally protected area.” Dissent at 3. No such burden is 
established. As has always been the case, the defendant need only establishthat the police breached his or her reasonable expectation of privacy under
Katz  or that the police engaged in a Jones/ Jardines  type of prohibited 
conduct. If a search has occurred, then the State must demonstrate the
existence of an exception to the search warrant requirement. In this case,
for example, consent would be a possible warrant exception in analyzing
whether the seizure of the hammer, the opening of the closed garbage bin in
Phillips’ garage, and the subsequent seizure of the clothing in the garbage
bin were constitutional. 
Contrary to the dissent’s view, we do not find Phillips’
invitation for the police to enter the exposed area of his garage to be thesame as the requisite consent needed to authorize the warrantless acts in
this case. 
We therefore analyze the constitutionality of those acts under
the plain view doctrine and the doctrine of inevitable discovery. See infra. 
As to the police officers’ entry into Phillips’ garage, we do not reach
whether an exception to the warrant requirement was present because, at theoutset, the relevant circumstances indicate that Phillips did not have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in the exposed areas of the garage and
that, therefore, the act of entry was not a search. 
-32 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
attach. Bonnell, 75 Hawaiʻ i at 139, 856 P.2d at 1274; Kaaheena , 
59 Hawai‘ i at 28, 575 P.2d at 466.  The police did not enter 
Phillips’ garage of their own initiative; rather, they were 
responding to Phillips’ 911 call for police assistance and his 
gesturing them into the garage. Hence, Phillips’ expectation of 
privacy was diminished. See State v. Lopez,  78 Hawaiʻ i 433, 442, 
896 P.2d 889, 898 (1995) (holding that the defendant’s 
expectation of privacy in his home was diminished by permitting 
entry by the police); United States v. Williams, No. 14-CR­20419, 2015 WL 730098, at *8 (E.D. Mich. Feb. 19, 2015) (holding 
that when the defendant invited the initial responders into his 
apartment to tend to his medical needs, he sacrificed much of 
his expectation of privacy); State v. Pearson–Anderson, 41 P.3d 
275, 279 (Idaho Ct. App. 2001) (“[B]y making the 911 call, [the 
defendant] diminished her reasonable expectation of privacy 
within her home by summoning police officers to the premises 
with an implied representation that an emergency was 
occurring.”). 
In addition, Phillips’ actions demonstrate that he did 
not take precautions to insure his privacy in the garage. See 
State v. Holbron , 65 Haw. 152, 154, 648 P.2d 194, 196 (1982) 
(stating that the determination of whether a defendant has a reasonable expectation of privacy in a particular place depends, 
in part, on the precautions he or she takes to insure the 
-33 ­  
 
                        
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
preservation of his or her privacy). Indeed, Phillips allowed 
the garage to become the center of activity for the initial 
investigation, including the location of Phillips’ demonstration 
of how the purported assailant gained access to the home through 
the malfunctioning garage door. By knowingly and voluntarily 
exposing the interior of his garage to the police, cf. State v. 
Dias, 62 Haw. 52, 56, 609 P.2d 637, 640 (1980) (“Conduct open to view and conversations audible to persons standing outside of a building constitute activities knowingly exposed to the 
public.”), and by readily allowing the area to be used by the 
emergency responders, any expectation of privacy in the exposed, 
visible interior of the garage was not “one that society would 
recognize as objectively reasonable.” Bonnell, 75 Haw. at 139, 
856 P.2d at 1274; Kaaheena
, 59 Haw. at 28, 575 P.2d at 466.12 If 
Phillips did not wish the garage to be entered into and its 
interior observed, he could have kept it closed and secured, or 
he could have refrained from motioning for the police to enter 
12 See also  People v. Hobson,  525 N.E.2d 895, 898— 99 (Ill. App. 
1988) (reasoning that the defendant’s act of opening the overhead door of his
garage indicated that any expectation of privacy he possessed as to the
exposed garage was not one that society would recognize as reasonable);
Tracht v. Comm’r of  Pub. Safety, 592 N.W.2d 863, 865 (Minn. Ct. App. 1999) 
(entry into open garage for the purpose of knocking on the exposed service
door was not a Fourth Amendment search); State v. Akins, No. C4- 99-1066, 2000 
WL 271986, at *3 (Minn. Ct. App. Mar. 14, 2000) (no search occurred when a 
police officer, without a warrant, entered an open garage “to talk to a
resident who himself is using the garage as a means of access”). 
-34 ­  
 
                        
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and directed them to access his home from another entryway. Cf. 
Dias, 62 Haw. at 56, 609 P.2d at 640. 
Therefore, with neither a subjective expectation of 
privacy, nor one that society would recognize as objectively 
reasonable, the police officers that Phillips summoned into his 
garage did not intrude upon Phillips’ reasonable expectation of 
privacy by entering the garage.13 Having found that the police 
did “not invade an individual’s legitimate expectation of 
privacy, ‘there is no “search” subject to the Warrant Clause.’” 
State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai‘ i 308, 312, 893 P.2d 159, 163 (1995) 
(quoting Illinois v. Andreas, 463 U.S. 765, 771 (1983)).14   
13 We do not find, as the dissent contends, that “because Phillips
invited police in, no constitutionally regulated search occurred when the
police entered Phillips’ home and garage.” Dissent at 2. A search and seizure occurred, which necessitated a warrant or an exception to the warrant
requirement, when the police recovered the hammer and clothing and opened a
closed receptacle inside the garage. See infra Part III.B— C.  We hold only
that the police officers’ act of entering Phillips’ exposed garage, uponPhillips’ invitation, did not constitute a search. 
14 The facts of this case similarly do not result in a finding of a
Fourth Amendment search or seizure pursuant to the Jones/Jardines  trespass-
intrusion test. This case lacks the hallmark facts involved in both 
Jones 
and Jardines
. At the threshold, this case does not meet the first
requirement of the Jones/Jardines test because there was no trespass or 
physical intrusion, that is, the act of “entering without permission.”
Black’s Law Dictionary at 951. Phillips called police dispatch to summon the
police to his home and, upon their arrival, affirmatively motioned them to 
come forward into his garage. 
Not only was there an absence of trespass or physical intrusion
in this case, but the purpose of the police when they entered Phillips’garage, objectively examined, was not to conduct a search and collect
evidence. Cf. 
Jones, 132 S. Ct. at 949; Jardines
, 133 S. Ct. at 1416.
Police entered Phillips’ garage to respond to Phillips’ report of a crime, toprevent any impediment to the medical responders who were treating Tara, and to assist Phillips or Tara as requested or needed. Thus, the police
officers’ act of entering the garage was not a search under 
Jones and 
Jardines
. On the other hand, the act of recovering the hammer and the
(. . .continued) 
-35 ­  
 
    
                                                                  
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. Prior decisions of this court 
Our determination that Phillips did not have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy in exposed areas of the garage 
and, thus, that no “search” occurred when the police entered the 
garage is in accordance with prior decisions of this court. In State v. Roy, 54 Haw. 513, 510 P.2d 1066 (1973), evidence was 
gathered by an undercover agent after he was willingly admitted 
into a home by the resident. Id.
 at 514, 510 P.2d at 1067. No 
warrant had been obtained by the police. See id. In ruling the 
evidence admissible, this court agreed with the analysis of the 
Supreme Court in Lewis v. United States, 385 U.S. 206 (1966): 
“It is unnecessary to determine whether the facts of this case 
come within one of [the search warrant] exceptions, however, for 
we hold that [the Officer’s] actions did not constitute a search or seizure as regulated by the Fourth Amendment.”
15 Roy, 54 Haw. 
(. . .continued) 
clothing was a seizure that required a warrant or an exception to the warrant
requirement. See infra Part III.B— C.  
The dissent disagrees with our conclusion that there was no
intent to search concurrent with the police’s entry, Dissent at 31—32 , but 
the dissent, in support of this contention, points only to portions of the
record purporting an intent to search after  the police entered the garage.  
Cf.  Florida v. Jardines,
 133 S. Ct. 1409, 1415— 17 (describing a search as 
trespass accompanied by a concurrent intent to gather evidence). 
15 In Lewis, a defendant invited an undercover agent into his home 
to sell the officer illegal narcotics. Lewis
, 385 U.S. at 208.  The 
defendant contended that “any official intrusion upon the privacy of a home 
constitutes a Fourth Amendment violation.” Id.  In rejecting the defendant’s
analysis and holding that the entry of the officer into the defendant’s home
was “no breach of privacy,” the Court adopted the following analysis: 
(. . .continued) 
-36 ­  
 
                                                                     
   
 
 
  
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
at 515, 510 P.2d at 1068 (emphasis added). Under such 
circumstances, the Roy court concluded, “No warrant to ‘search 
and seize’ is required . . . .” Id. at 516, 510 P.2d at 1068 
(emphasis added).
16 “It is clear beyond peradventure . . . that 
the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . . . does not 
prohibit the introduction into evidence . . . [of items] 
‘seized’ by [the officer.]” Id. at 516—17, 510 P.2d at 1068. 
The court reached a similar conclusion under article I, 
(. . .continued) 
[T]his case involves the exercise of no governmental power
to intrude upon protected premises; the visitor was invited 
and willingly admitted  by the suspect.  It concerns no 
design on the part of a government agent to observe or hearwhat was happening in the privacy of a home; the suspect
chose the location where the transaction took place. It 
presents no question of the invasion of the privacy of a
dwelling .  . . .
”  
Id.  at 212 (emphases added).  Thus, the Court found that under the
circumstances of a willing invitation, the protections of the Fourth
Amendment are not implicated. Lewis  rests upon a determination that the 
defendant lacked a reasonable expectation of priva
cy.  
16 Under the dissent’s approach, which treats entries into homes and
curtilages as searches per se, the undercover agent in Roy would not have 
been able to enter the home even upon the willing invitation of the resident.This is so because consent must be “knowingly, freely and intelligently” 
given, State v. Patterson, 58 Haw. 462, 470, 571 P.2d 745, 750 (1977), and 
“[c]onsent, based upon . . . material nondisclosures, can hardly be viewed as
either voluntary or intelligent.” State v. Quino, 74 Haw. 161, 175, 840 P.2d
358, 364 (1992). Thus, under the dissent’s consent theory, no undercover
police officer will ever be able to enter homes and curtilages without first
disclosing his or her real identity in order to procure voluntary, knowing,and intelligent consent, rendering undercover operations in homes and
curtilages virtually impossible. This result plainly contradicts the holding
of 
Roy
. 
-37 ­  
 
    
                     
    
  
 
   
 
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 7 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution.17 Id. at 517, 510 P.2d at 
1068. 
Thus, this court has held that, under the 
circumstances of an invitation to and voluntary admittance of a 
government agent into a home by a resident, the protections of 
article I, section 7 are not implicated as to the entry into the 
home, because such an entry is not a search in a constitutional 
sense. Applying Roy to the present case, it is clear that 
Phillips invited and willingly admitted police into his garage 
on the morning of September 3, 2008, and thus, the protections 
of article I, section 7 were not implicated and the police’s 
entry into Phillips’ garage was not a search.18 
In Lopez, police responded to reports of a home 
invasion and robbery. 
78 Hawaiʻ i at 437, 896 P.2d at 893.  
Police arrived while the residents were at home; following an 
17 Roy  references article I, s ection 5 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution; 
article I, s ection 5 was renumbered to a rticle I, s ection 7 following the 
1978 Constitutional Convention (Ratified November 7, 1978). State v. Okubo, 
3 Haw. App. 396, 399 n.4, 651 P.2d 494, 498 n.4 (1982), 
aff’d, 67 Haw. 197, 
682 P.2d 79 (1984). 
18 In State v. Davidsen , 129 Hawaiʻ i 451, 303 P.3d 1228 (App. 2013) 
(mem), the holding of Roy was found to include situations in which the 
resident is specifically aware that the person he or she has admitted into
his or her home is a law enforcement officer. In Davidsen, police 
investigating a theft came to a home to investigate the sale of property
alleged to have been taken in the theft. Id. at *1. 
The ICA noted that 
“[w]hat a person knowingly exposes to the public, even in his own home oroffice, is not a subject of Fourth Amendment protection,” 
id. at *2 
(alteration in original) (quoting Katz, 389 U.S. at 351), and that the 
resident “no longer maintain[ed] an actual expectation of privacy in thoseareas” of his home, id.
 at *3. 
-38 ­  
 
    
 
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“initial investigation,” both police and the residents left the 
home. Id. Based on a suspicion that the home invasion and 
robbery were motivated by illicit drug activity by the residents, the police returned later without permission or 
obtaining a search warrant and recovered evidence of drugs. Id. 
at 438, 447, 896 P.2d at 894, 903. 
The drug evidence was ruled 
the result of an illegal search. Id. at 447, 896 P.2d at 903. 
The State had argued that, based on the 911 call, the residents’ 
reasonable expectation of privacy in their home had been 
diminished. Id. at 441, 896 P.2d at 897. This court partially 
agreed. 
When the police initially entered the [residents’] home to
investigate the robbery that had just taken place, they did
so with the [resident’s] permission. Thus, during thecourse of this 
initial investigation,  the [resident’s]
expectation of privacy in their home was, as theprosecution contends, “diminished.” 
Id. at 442, 896 P.2d at 898 (emphases added). That is, when a 
resident permits police to enter his or her home to investigate 
a crime or for other purpose, the resident has not exhibited a 
reasonable expectation of privacy into areas knowingly exposed, 
and hence, the police’s entry would not qualify, 
constitutionally speaking, as a search.19 
19 However, that expectation “terminated when the police and the
[residents] closed the doors and left the . . . residence.” As soon as that 
occurred, “the [residents’] expectation of privacy in their home was
completely restored.” Lopez, 78 Hawai i at 442, 896 P.2d at 898. Thus, only
following the restoration of the residents’ expectation of privacy did police
activities implicating a rticle I, s ection 7 occur:  “We . . . hold that [the 
officer’s subsequent] entrance into the . . . home, whatever the purpose,
(. . .continued) 
-39 ­  
 
    
                                                                  
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Thus, these decisions demonstrate that this court will 
review an expectation of privacy according to the circumstances 
presented, rather than assume that a reasonable expectation of 
privacy exists solely based on a location. See Ward , 62 Haw. at 
515, 617 P.2d at 572; 
Stachler
, 58 Haw. at 416, 570 P.2d at 
1326. Roy and Lopez indicate that a resident, who invites and 
willingly admits an agent of the government into his or her home, may not claim a reasonable expectation of privacy into those areas knowingly exposed. Here, as in Roy and Lopez, the 
police were invited by Phillips into the “garage area” through 
his 911 call, his beckoning of police “to come forward” into the 
open garage, and his willing admittance of the officers to 
respond to and investigate the assault on Tara. Thus, the 
police’s act of entering the garage was not a search in the 
constitutional sense. 
B. The hammer is admissible under the plain view doctrine 
When “a governmental intrusion does not invade an 
individual’s legitimate expectation of privacy, [then] there is 
no search subject to the Warrant Clause.” State v. Meyer, 78 
Hawai‘i 308, 312, 893 P.2d 159, 163 (1995) (emphasis added).  In 
this case, when the police officers entered the open garage, 
(. . .continued) 
over six hours after everyone had left was a search in the constitutional
sense.” Id. 
-40 ­  
 
                        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
there was no search, and the police officers were authorized to 
be where they were. It is important to note, however, that even 
in cases where no search in the constitutional sense has 
transpired, seizures of property remain under the restraints of 
the Fourth Amendment and article I, section 7. Soldal v. Cook 
Cty., 506 U.S. 56, 68 (1992) (“[S]eizures of property are 
subject to Fourth Amendment scrutiny even though no search 
within the meaning of the Amendment has taken place.”). 
Hence, 
the seizure of property inside the garage was valid only if 
authorized by a warrant or an exception to the warrant 
requirement. One well-settled exception is the “plain view 
doctrine,” which allows the police to seize evidence or 
contraband sighted in plain view from a lawful vantage point. 
State v. Davenport, 55 Haw. 90, 100—01, 516 P.2d 65, 72 (1973) 
(“So long as the searching officer is in a position where he is 
lawfully entitled to be, the seizure of any evidence of crime is 
permissible.”); see also 1 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 
2.2
 (5th ed. 2013). In cases where the police have not invaded 
an individual’s legitimate expectation of privacy and are thus not conducting a search, they are not required to turn a blind 
eye to obvious signs of criminality; rather, they are empowered 
to summarily seize such evidence or contraband under the “plain 
view doctrine.”
20 “[O]nce the intrusion is justified, there is 
20 The plain view doctrine is commonly applied in situations when
(. . .continued)  
-41 ­  
 
    
 
 
                                                                  
   
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
no requirement of exigency for the police to seize evidence in 
plain view.” Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 316, 893 P.2d at 167 . 
Under the plain view doctrine, there has been neither 
an “exploration” for a particular item, nor is the particular 
item “hidden.” Meyer
, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 312, 893 P.2d at 163.   
What the “ plain view” cases have in common is that the 
police officer had a prior justification for an intrusion
.  .  .  . The doctrine serves to supplement the prior 
justification --  whether it be a warrant for another 
object, hot pursuit, search incident to lawful arrest, orsome other legitimate reason for being present
. 
Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 466 (1971) (emphases 
added). Thus, “‘plain view observations’ do not ‘involve a 
search in the constitutional sense.’”21 State v. Wallace, 80 
Hawaiʻi 382, 398, 910 P.2d 695, 711 (1996) (alteration omitted) 
(quoting Meyer, 78 Hawai i at 312, 893 P.2d at 163). 
The plain view doctrine requires demonstration by the 
State of three factors for the warrantless seizure of evidence 
or contraband to be legitimate: (1) prior justification for the 
intrusion or proof that the government agents were properly in a position from which they can view the area involved; (2) 
(. . .continued) 
police are lawfully engaged in a search pursuant to a warrant. See, e.g., 
State v. Wallace, 80 Hawaiʻ i 382, 400, 910 P.2d 695, 713 (1996) (applying the 
plain view doctrine to justify the seizure of plastic packets observed during
a search pursuant to a warrant). 
21 “A search compromises the individual interest in privacy; a
seizure deprives the individual of dominion over his or her person orproperty.” Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 133 (1990). 
- 42 ­  
 
    
                     
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
inadvertent discovery; and (3) probable cause to believe the 
item is evidence of a crime or contraband. Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 
314, 893 P.2d at 165; Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 736—37 
(1983). 
1. Lawful presence in the area affording plain view 
So long as the “police are lawfully in a position from 
which they view an object, if its incriminating character is 
immediately apparent, and if the officers have a lawful right of 
access to the object, they may seize it without a warrant.” 
Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 316, 893 P.2d at 167 (quoting Minnesota v. 
Dickerson
, 508 U.S. 366, 375 (1993)).22 Thus, because it has 
been established that police entry into the open garage did not 
violate Phillips’ reasonable expectation of privacy, the police 
presence in his garage was lawful. 
The prior justification for the police presence in his 
garage on the morning of September 3, 2008, was conceded by 
Phillips in his opening brief to the ICA: “As to the first 
factor, there was prior justification for Officer Tokunaga’s 
intrusion as he was allowed to be in [Phillips’] garage.” 
22 In cases where there exists an intrusion by law enforcement, that
intrusion may be justified for a variety of reasons. See  Davenport,  55 Haw. 
at 98, 516 P.2d at 71 (police intrusion justified under search warrant);
Wallace, 80 Hawaiʻ i at 398, 910 P.2d at 711 (same); State v. Jenkins, 93 
Hawaiʻi 87, 104, 997 P.2d 13, 30 (2000) (search of vehicle trunk based on 
probable cause); State v. Ogata, 58 Haw. 514, 572 P.2d 1222 (1977) (open view
seizure of weapon seen in vehicle incident to valid stop); Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i 
308, 893 P.2d 159 (entry into vehicle on request of arrestee). 
-43 ­  
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Phillips also conceded this point at the hearing on the motion 
to suppress: “So in this case we won’t deny that . . . [the 
police] were there because, you know, [Phillips] had called 911 
and they were -- they had a right to be there at the time.” 
(Emphasis added). 
2. Inadvertent discovery 
Although the United States Supreme Court eliminated 
the “inadvertent discovery” element from the plain view 
exception, Hawaiʻ i retains the requirement as necessary to 
“prevent[] pretextual article I, section 7 activity.” Meyer, 78 
Hawaiʻi at 314 n.6, 893 P.2d at 165 n.6 (adopting Justice 
Brennan’s dissenting opinion in Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 
128 (1990)). Justice Brennan explained: 
[W]e accept a warrantless seizure when an officer is 
lawfully in a location and inadvertently sees evidence of acrime . . . But ‘
where the discovery is anticipated, where 
the police know in advance the location of the evidence andintend to seize it’  . . . there is no reason why the police 
officers could not have obtained a warrant to seize this evidence before entering the premises. 
Horton, 496 U.S. at 144 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (emphases 
added) (quoting Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 470). Thus, the purpose 
of retaining the inadvertent discovery requirement is to ensure 
that law enforcement officers are not excused “from the general 
requirement of a warrant to seize if the officers know the 
location of evidence, have probable cause to seize it, intend to 
seize it
, and yet do not bother to obtain a warrant particularly 
-44 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
describing that evidence.” State v. Cuntapay , 104 Hawaiʻ i 109, 
118, 85 P.3d 634, 643 (2004) (emphases added); see also Meyer, 
78 Hawaiʻ i at 314 n.6, 893 P.2d at 165 n.6.  “So long as the 
officer is in a position where the officer is lawfully entitled 
to be, the seizure of contraband or evidence of crime is 
permissible.” Davenport, 55 Haw. at 101, 516 P.2d at 72. 
It is self-evident that if a law enforcement officer 
is unaware of the existence of certain evidence or contraband, then that law enforcement officer cannot know its location. 
Neither can the officer have probable cause to seize, or intend 
to seize, such unknown evidence or contraband. 
Thus, the 
“inadvertent discovery” element of the plain view exception to the warrant requirement is satisfied if the law enforcement 
officer, justifiably present at a given location, is unaware of the existence of such evidence at issue until the moment of the 
discovery. It is the uncontroverted testimony of Officer 
Tokunaga that the hammer was plainly visible in the garage and 
entirely exposed. This is confirmed by the photographic 
evidence provided by the State at the hearing on the suppression 
motion, which shows a metal hammer with a black handle lying 
unconcealed on top of a blue cooler along one wall of the 
garage. 
There has been no suggestion that prior to the 
discovery of the hammer, law enforcement officers were aware of 
-45 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
its existence; that is, the officers did not know the location 
of a hammer, did not have probable cause to seize a hammer from 
Phillips’ residence, and did not arrive at Phillips’ residence 
intending to seize a hammer. In fact, at the moment before the 
hammer was discovered, the HPD officers had no reason to suspect 
that a hammer was in any way involved in the assault on Tara. 
Officer Tokunaga testified that at the time he found the hammer, 
he did not know the general facts of the case, nor was any particular person a suspect. Further, Officer Tokunaga found 
the hammer shortly after his arrival. There is also no 
suggestion that the seizure of a hammer was made as a pretext in 
lieu of properly obtaining a warrant. It follows, therefore, 
that Officer Tokunaga’s discovery of the hammer was inadvertent. 
Once Officer Tokunaga inadvertently saw the hammer from a 
position that he lawfully held, he was not required to ignore 
its presence. 
Davenport , 55 Haw. at 101, 516 P.2d 65, 72. 
Indeed, Officer Tokunaga’s inadvertent discovery of 
the hammer was conceded by Phillips at the hearing: “So in this case we won’t deny that . . . they discovered the hammer, . . . 
and that was lawful . . . .” 
Thus, the second requirement of 
the plain view doctrine is satisfied. 
-46 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3. Probable cause to believe that the hammer was evidence of a 
crime 
Under the third element of a plain-view seizure, there 
must be probable cause to believe that the item is contraband or 
evidence of a crime. Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 314, 893 P.2d at 165 
In the context of a plain-view seizure, “probable cause” means 
such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary caution 
or prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong 
suspicion that the inadvertently observed object was contraband 
or evidence of a crime. See State v. Naole
, 80 Hawaiʻ i 419, 424, 
910 P.2d 732, 737 (1996). 
Probable cause for a plain-view seizure may be 
established when the incriminating character of the evidence or contraband is “immediately apparent.” 
Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 316, 
893 P.2d at 167. The surrounding circumstances of an 
observation of an object by police are part of the probable 
cause determination. Based on Officer Tokunaga’s observation of 
a “spot of blood” on the hammer, it is clear that a reasonable 
person would believe and entertain a strong suspicion that the hammer was evidence of a crime. The parties do not dispute that 
the “spot of blood” on the hammer, observed by Officer Tokunaga 
after the hammer’s inadvertent discovery, constituted probable 
cause to believe that the hammer was relevant evidence. 
Phillips concedes this point: “As to the third factor [of the 
-47 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
plain view doctrine], there was probable cause to believe [that] 
the hammer was evidence of a crime as Officer Tokunaga noticed 
what appeared to be blood on the metal portion of the hammer.” 
Accordingly, because the facts of this case satisfy all three 
prongs of the plain view doctrine, the warrantless seizure of 
the hammer was authorized. 
4. The ICA erred in suppressing the hammer 
The ICA’s conclusion that “the intentional search and 
seizure of the hammer under the plain view doctrine was not valid” is analytically flawed. 
First, as discussed, there was 
no “search” in the constitutional sense. Although Officer Tokunaga was instructed to “search” for perpetrators or weapons, 
a “search” in the constitutional sense occurs only when there is 
a governmental intrusion into a reasonable expectation of privacy, 
State v. Kender , 60 Haw. 301, 303, 588 P.2d 447, 449 
(1978), or a Jones/Jardines trespass or physical intrusion. 
Officer Keliinui’s colloquial use of the word “search” 
is not determinative: “When a governmental intrusion does not invade an individual’s legitimate expectation of privacy,” or 
when a search under the 
Jones/Jardines test does not transpire, 
“there is no ‘search’ subject to the Warrant Clause.” Meyer, 78 
Hawaiʻi at 312, 893 P.2d at 163.  Where there is no Fourth 
Amendment or article I, section 7 search, then inadvertently discovered items in plain view may be seized upon probable cause 
-48 ­  
 
                        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to believe that the items are contraband or evidence of a crime. 
Id. at 314, 893 P.2d at 165. Here, as has been established, 
there was no search under the Katz reasonable-expectation test 
or the Jones
/Jardines trespass-intrusion test. 
Second, the ICA erred in relying on a common 
dictionary definition of “inadvertent” when the legal concept of 
“inadvertent discovery” was at issue.23 This court specifically 
retained “inadvertent discovery” as a requirement of the plain 
view doctrine “in order to foster the objective of preventing 
pretextual article I, section 7 activity.” Meyer, 78 Hawaiʻ i at 
314 n.6, 893 P.2d at 165 n.6. Thus, in the context of the plain 
view doctrine, inadvertence does not mean “accidental”; it means that law enforcement officers did not know the location of 
evidence, did not have probable cause to seize it, did not 
intend to seize it, and were thus logically unable to “obtain a 
warrant particularly describing that evidence.” Cuntapay
, 104 
Hawaiʻi at 118, 85 P.3d at 643.   
As Phillips did not hold a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in his garage during the initial police investigation in the early morning hours of September 3, 2008, and because there 
was no search under the Jones/Jardines trespass-intrusion test, 
23 Unlike the lay meaning of “inadvertent,” the legal term
“inadvertent discovery” means a “law- enforcement officer’s unexpected finding 
of incriminating evidence in plain view.” Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 
2014). 
-49 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the police entry into his garage was lawful, and no search in 
the constitutional sense occurred. Since the discovery of the 
hammer was inadvertent and there was probable cause to seize it, 
its seizure was lawful. Thus, there was no requirement for the 
police to have first obtained a search warrant before seizing 
the hammer. 
Further, when performing a lawful search, plain-view 
seizure of items outside of the scope of the warrant is not precluded by the intentional looking for or examining of items 
within the scope of the search, provided the other elements of 
plain view are met. Compare Wallace,
 80 Hawaiʻ i at 399, 910 P.2d 
at 712 (seizure valid under plain view doctrine where officer, 
during a valid intentional search of a bag in a car, 
inadvertently observed contraband contained in clear plastic 
packets) , and State v. Jenkins,  93 Hawaiʻ i 87, 104, 997 P.2d 13, 
30 (2000) (gun protruding from a duffle bag legitimately seized 
after being observed in plain view during a legitimate 
warrantless search of a car trunk), with Cuntapay, 104 Hawai‘ i at 
118, 85 P.3d at 643 (purported plain-view seizure not proper 
when police had no prior justification for the intrusion into 
the washroom, and discovery found not inadvertent because 
observation of contraband required officer to move a “‘washing 
machine away from the wall in order to closely inspect’ the 
‘evidence that otherwise would not have been visible to 
-50 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
police’”). Indeed, if the inadvertency element of a plain-view 
seizure required an “accidental” discovery, then the plain view 
doctrine could never apply to a seizure of evidence that is 
discovered during execution of a search warrant issued to find 
unrelated evidence. Such an interpretation has been rejected by 
this court. Davenport,  55 Haw. at 100, 516 P.2d at 72 (holding 
that an otherwise permissible search is not rendered unlawful merely because a different contraband is discovered than what was listed in the warrant). 
Thus, the ICA’s application of the plain view doctrine 
was flawed for the following reasons: article 1, section 7 of 
the Hawai
ʻi Constitution was not offended by the police entry 
into Phillips’ garage during the initial investigation into the 
assault of Tara on the morning of September 3, 2008; no search 
in the constitutional sense occurred as a result of the 
observation of the hammer; and the definition of inadvertent 
discovery, as an element of a plain-view seizure, is provided by 
our case law, and reliance on a dictionary was not necessary. 
As a result, the ICA gravely erred in suppressing the hammer. 
C. The clothing was inevitably discovered 
As already noted, the facts and circumstances of this 
case manifest that Phillips did not possess a reasonable expectation of privacy in the exposed interior of his garage, 
nor did the police officers’ entry into the garage constitute a 
-51 ­  
 
                        
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
search pursuant to the Jones/Jardines trespass-intrusion test. 
Hence, the police were authorized to enter the garage; however, 
Phillips’ invitation to enter in no way authorized the police to 
summarily open closed receptacles inside the garage and seize 
evidence hidden from plain view. The instant the police engaged 
in such activities, a search and seizure in a constitutional 
sense occurred, the validity of which required either a valid 
warrant or an exception to the warrant requirement. The circuit court in this case determined that the police would have 
inevitably discovered the clothing found inside the garbage 
bin.
24 Under the inevitable discovery rule, evidence obtained in 
violation of article I, section 7 of the Hawai i Constitution may 
be admitted as evidence at trial if the State presents clear and 
convincing proof that the evidence would inevitably have been 
discovered by lawful means. State v. Lopez,  78 Hawaiʻ i 433, 451, 
896 P.2d 889, 907 (1995). Thus, the inevitable discovery 
exception hypothesizes that the evidence subject to the 
exclusionary rule would have been found through legal means 
independent of the unlawful seizure. Id. 
24 By applying an exception to the exclusionary rule, the circuit 
court implicitly concluded that Officer Frank’s discovery of the clothing in
the garbage bin violated a rticle 1, s ection 7 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution.  
See  State v. Tanaka , 67 Haw. 658, 661, 701 P.2d 1274, 1276 (1985) (concluding 
that a reasonable expectation of privacy exists in a closed garbage bag). 
-52 ­  
 
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The hypothetical situation in this case is the warrant 
that was subsequently issued to the police after the clothing 
had already been discovered and seized. Two issues are 
therefore germane: first, whether there was probable cause for 
the issuance of a warrant even without statements unlawfully 
obtained from Phillips and any information derived from the 
clothing found inside Phillips’ garbage bin, and second, whether 
the clothing would have been found pursuant to that warrant. 
See State v. Sepa , 72 Haw. 141, 144, 808 P.2d 848, 850 (1991) 
(holding that a warrant based on an affidavit containing material misstatements could nonetheless establish probable 
cause if “the affidavit’s content, with the false material 
omitted, is sufficient to establish probable cause”); Lopez, 78 
Hawaii at 447—48, 896 P.2d at 903—04 (stating that “a search 
warrant is not constitutionally defective because it is based, 
in part, on illegally seized evidence where sufficient probable 
cause exists to issue the warrant without relying on the 
suppressed evidence”). 
Turning to the first issue, a search warrant must 
always be predicated “upon a finding of probable cause supported 
by oath or affirmation.” State v. Navas , 81 Hawaiʻ i 113, 116, 
913 P.2d 39, 42 (1996). “Probable cause exists when the facts 
and circumstances within one’s knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves 
-53 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an 
offense has been committed.” Id. 
An affidavit in support of a finding of probable cause 
should “set forth ‘some of the underlying circumstances’ from 
which the police concluded that the objects sought to be 
recovered were where they claimed they were, and disclose some 
of the underlying reasons from which the affiant concluded that 
the information was ‘reliable.’” Sepa, 72 Haw. at 143—44, 808 
P.2d at 850 (quoting
 State v. Kanda, 63 Haw. 36, 620 P.2d 1072 
(1980)). The determination of whether probable cause supported the issuance of a search warrant is reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard of review. Navas, 81 Hawaiʻ i at 123, 913 
P.2d at 49. 
The Affidavit that Detective Sunia submitted in 
support of her application for a search warrant stated that 
Phillips told responding officers that he left his residence and 
went for a ride in his car because he could not sleep. Phillips 
told Officer Collins that before leaving his residence, he 
closed the garage door but left the door leading into the kitchen from the garage unlocked. 
Detective Sunia emphasized in 
her Affidavit that this was inconsistent with Phillips’ account of the events to Officer Ahn. Phillips told Officer Ahn that he 
left the garage door open when he left. There was no indication 
of forced entry. 
-54 ­  
 
     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tara sustained a massive blunt force trauma to her 
head, was in critical condition, had a broken wrist, and had 
some of her fingernails ripped off. A bloody footprint was 
present on the sheet covering the bed in which Tara was found. 
There was blood splatter on the walls of the bedroom in which 
Tara was found, but there was no indication of any transfer of 
large amounts of blood on the stairs or other rooms in the 
residence. 
Police officers found a hammer lying by the garage 
door, and Phillips admitted that he owned that hammer. The hammer found in the garage had traces of what appeared to be 
dried blood. 
Phillips informed one HFD firefighter that he had been 
arguing with Tara earlier, before he left for a drive. One of 
the children informed Officer Rivera that, on September 3, 2008, 
Tara and Phillips had been arguing “because [Phillips was] 
texting other women and cheating on [Tara].” A neighbor stated that, on September 1, 2008, at around 10:00 a.m., “he heard 
people arguing inside” the residence and that, on September 3, 
2008, at around 3:30 a.m., “he heard a loud thumping sound 
coming from the residence . . . , as if someone had fallen down 
the stairs.” The search warrant application was further 
supported by Detective Sunia’s statement in her affidavit that 
based on her experience, training, and qualifications, homicide 
-55 ­  
 
     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
suspects use their vehicles and personal property, including 
bags, pouches, and closed containers, to conceal 
instrumentalities utilized in the commission of the crime. See 
State v. Groves , 65 Haw. 104, 114, 649 P.2d 366, 373 (1982) 
(relying on a police officer’s experience and expertise to 
establish probable cause); accord State v. Chong, 52 Haw. 226, 
231—32, 473 P.2d 567, 571 (1970). 
The circuit court found that the foregoing facts 
constituted clear and convincing evidence that, even if illegally obtained statements and information relating to the 
discovery and seizure of the clothing were redacted from the 
affidavit, probable cause existed to justify the issuance of a 
warrant. 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in 
determining that these facts would have produced in the mind of a reasonable person a firm belief that a criminal offense was 
committed in Phillips’ house and against Tara. 
See Lopez , 78 
Hawaiʻi at 454 n.30, 896 P.2d at 910 n.30.   
The second issue--
whether the clothing would have been 
found pursuant to the warrant--in turn has two components: 
whether the scope of the warrant would have allowed the police 
to discover and thereafter seize the clothing, and whether the 
circumstances are such that the clothing would still have been 
in the garbage bin after the police secured and thereafter 
executed a search warrant. 
-56 ­  
 
     
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
As to scope, the search warrant authorized the police 
to search “the . . . residence as well as any and all closed 
containers contained within, which are currently secured and 
being watched by an officer with the Honolulu Police 
Department.” (Emphasis added). Further, the warrant permitted 
the police to search and seize “all items of evidence, 
including, but not limited to physical, transfer, and trace 
evidence (personal property and/or biological evidence), which would tend to establish the identi[t]y of the person(s) 
occupying the vehicle and/or residence, and which may include . 
. . articles of clothing.” The scope of the warrant thus 
provided clear and convincing evidence that the police would 
have discovered the clothing in the garbage bin once the warrant 
was executed. 
As to whether the clothing would still have been in 
the searched premises when the warrant was executed, t
he 
affidavit expressed that the residence was “being secured . . . 
by the presence of police units on scene” and was “unoccupied 
and within an enclosed area, inaccessible to members of the 
public.” The affidavit also stated that closed containers 
within the residence were “currently secured and being watched 
by an officer with the Honolulu Police Department.” These facts 
indicate that nobody, not even Phillips, was allowed to access 
or occupy any part of Phillips’ residence, and a police officer 
-57 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was standing guard while a warrant application was being 
prepared for the examination and approval of a judge. Hence, 
there is no merit in Phillips’ argument that he could have 
returned to his residence and tampered with the clothing between 
the time when he left the police station and the execution of 
the warrant, thereby precluding the inevitable discovery of the 
clothing. 
The circuit court thus concluded, and we agree, that 
the government satisfied its “burden to show by clear and convincing evidence that the clothing found within a covered 
trash container in the garage would inevitably have been 
discovered . . . under the authority of the September 3, 2008, 
search warrant covering the residence and its garage and any 
containers located therein.” 
D. 
The dissent misapprehends and misapplies the Katz
reasonable expectation of privacy paradigm 
For the dissent, any entry by the police into a home 
or its curtilage is a search under the Katz reasonable 
expectation of privacy test, requiring consent (an exception to the warrant requirement) in order to pass constitutional muster. 
Dissent at 18—24. This is true even in cases where the interior 
of that area has been knowingly exposed for anyone to view, the 
police were invited there by the resident, and the police 
purpose upon entry is not to gather evidence. The dissent 
-58 ­  
 
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
effectively creates a per se rule that would find any entry, 
including those elicited by an invitation, into a home or its 
curtilage as a search. 
Further, the dissent reasons that the invitation by 
the resident to the police to respond to an emergency or a 
report of suspected criminal activity constitutes an implied 
consent for the police not only to enter the home but also “to a 
brief initial search of the premises to determine whether there were other victims or perpetrators present at the scene.” 
Dissent at 2. 
According to the dissent’s summary of its recommended 
test, 
when a defendant calls the police to a place in which
he/she has a reasonable expectation of privacy, and the
defendant reports that a crime has been committed there,
he/she consent to a brief search of the premises by thepolice so that the police can secure the location and 
determine whether there are other possible victims or
perpetrator(s) present at the scene. The defendant’s 
consent, however, does not extend to a wholesale search of
the premises such that the police are then free to gothrough bathroom and kitchen cabinets, personal effects, or
closed containers.   
Dissent at 29—30. Thus, this “consent” to search applies 
automatically to a place where the caller has a reasonable 
expectation of privacy. 
The dissent’s approach is fundamentally flawed for 
four reasons: (1) it is inconsistent with the precept that a 
search in the constitutional sense does not arise solely based on the nature and character of the area upon which the police 
-59 ­  
 
    
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
intrusion is directed; (2) it is not supported by precedent; (3) 
it flows from the emergency exception to the warrant requirement 
that Hawai i has never adopted; and (4) it is contrary to the 
fundamental tenets of the consent doctrine. 
1. Protections Afforded by the Fourth Amendment and Article
I, Section 7 Do Not Automatically Attach Based on the Place
Involved 
The Supreme Court, and later this court, “rejected the 
idea that some areas are automatically accorded constitutional 
protection while others are not.” State v. Stachler,  58 Haw. 
412, 416, 570 P.2d 1323, 1326 (1977); State v. Kaaheena, 59 Haw. 
23, 26 & n.4, 575 P.2d 462, 465 & n.4 (1978) (recognizing that 
pursuant to Katz, traditional constitutionally protected areas, 
such as homes, are “no longer afforded automatic constitutional 
protection”); Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 351 (1967). 
This rejected idea, however, forms the very basis for the 
dissent’s creation of a per se rule that a person always has a reasonable expectation of privacy in his or her home and its 
curtilage. 
The dissent thus rejects the long-established 
principle that “[w]hat a person knowingly exposes to the public, 
even in his own home or office, is not a subject of Fourth 
Amendment protection.” 
Stachler , 58 Haw. at 416, 570 P.2d at 
1326 (quoting Katz, 389 U.S. at 351). By adhering to the view that any entry into a home or its curtilage--even those whose 
-60 ­  
 
                        
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interior has been knowingly exposed to the public--is a search, 
the dissent also discredits the practice in this jurisdiction to 
engage in a case-by-case consideration of different factors in 
the course of determining whether a search has occurred within 
the meaning of the Fourth Amendment and article I, section 7. 
State v. Ward, 62 Haw. 509, 515, 617 P.2d 568, 572 (1980).25 The 
determination of whether a search in a constitutional sense has transpired does not depend solely on the nature and character of the area upon which the police intrusion is directed, but it is 
informed by the confluence of relevant circumstances bearing 
upon the determination of whether a person has a reasonable 
expectation of privacy in an area or whether a 
Jones/Jardines 
type of prohibited conduct has occurred. Id. The manifest 
flaws in the dissent’s search doctrine are underscored by its 
determination that despite Phillips having called the police to 
his home because of an assault on Tara that resulted in serious 
injuries, despite the garage door being open and its interior exposed to the public, despite Phillips having invited the 
police to enter his garage, and despite the record not 
containing any actions or statements by Phillips indicating that 
25 The dissent claims that its proposed analytical framework is the
“unanimous approach” followed by other jurisdictions. Dissent at 2. But see 
supra 
note 12.  
In any event, the holdings of the cases that the dissent
cites do not stand for the proposition that any police entry into a home or
its curtilage is per se a search in the constitutional sense. See infra Part 
D.2. 
-61 ­  
 
      
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the garage area was private, the dissent concludes that Phillips 
had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his garage. Such an 
approach would leave very little, if anything, remaining of a 
meaningful Katz analysis.26 
2. Supreme Court precedents do not support the dissent’s
analysis 
The dissent asserts that its approach flows directly 
from Mincey v. Arizona , 437 U.S. 385 (1978); Flippo v. W. 
Virginia, 528 U.S. 11 (1999) (per curiam); and Thompson v. Louisiana, 469 U.S. 17 (1984) (per curiam). Dissent at 25—26. 
The fundamental issue in these cases was the validity of the 
police’s reentry into homes after the exception that legitimized 
their initial entry had expired. See Mincey, 437 U.S. at 391— 
92; Flippo, 528 U.S. at 11, 13—14; Thompson, 469 U.S. 17, 18-19, 21—22. None of these cases involved a home or its curtilage 
that its owner or resident knowingly exposed to public view to 
such an extent that a reasonable expectation of privacy in the 
area would be found lacking.
27 Additionally, none of these cases 
26 The dissent makes the assertion that our application of the Katz 
and Jones/ Jardines tests results in the evisceration of privacy rights.  
However, we simply apply  Katz, as that case has been understood since its 
inception, and Jones/ Jardines to the facts of this case.  Our continued 
application of the Katz  and the Jones/ Jardines tests yields only the 
conclusion that the entry of the police, pursuant to a resident’s invitation,
to knowingly exposed premises is not a search. However, a subsequent seizure
or search, including the exploration of concealed areas and closed
containers, must be authorized by a warrant or an exception to the warrant
requirement. 
27 The same is true for the state appellate cases from which the
dissent extracts its proposed analytical framework. 
-62 ­  
 
                        
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
held that mere physical entry, upon a resident’s invitation, 
into knowingly exposed premises automatically constitutes a 
search for which a warrant or an exception to the warrant 
requirement is mandatory.28 Hence, these cases do not support 
the dissent’s position. 
Further, in each of these cases, the Supreme Court 
found that the limits of the States’ “emergency” exception had been exceeded, impelling the need for a warrant (or a recognized exception to the warrant requirement) to legitimize the ensuing 
general exploratory search by the police. Mincey, 437 U.S. at 
392; 
Flippo, 528 U.S. at 14; Thompson, 469 U.S. at 22. Hawaiʻ i 
28 In Mincey, the officers gathered evidence for four days, 
during which period the entire apartment was searched,
photographed, and diagrammed. The officers opened drawers,closets, and cupboards, and inspected their contents; they
emptied clothing pockets; they dug bullet fragments out of
the walls and floors; they pulled up sections of the carpet
and removed them for examination. Every item in the
apartment was closely examined and inventoried, and 200 to300 objects were seized. 
Mincey, 437 U.S. at 389.  In Flippo, the police reentered a cabin where a 
crime was apparently committed and, in the course of approximately 
sixteen
hours, “took photographs, collected evidence, and searched through the contents of the cabin.” Flippo, 528 U.S. at 12.  In Thompson, the 
investigators conducted a general exploratory search for evidence of a crime
and examined each room of the residence involved. Thompson, 469 U.S. at 18­
19. 
State v. Patterson,  58 Haw. 462, 468, 571 P.2d 745, 749 (1977),
the sole Hawai i case that the dissent relies upon, also does not support the 
dissent’s approach. 
In that case, this court did not hold that mere entry
into the defendant’s home was a search in the constitutional sense. Id. at 
467, 571 P.2d at 748. 
Further, the fact that no search was found to have
been conducted when the police entered the defendant’s home upon the
defendant’s invitation is consistent with our conclusion in this case that 
the police did not engage in a search when they entered the exposed interior
of Phillips’ garage on Phillips’ invitation. 
-63 ­  
 
   Flippo
 
                     
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
has not considered whether article I, section 7 encompasses an 
emergency exception to the warrant requirement. Consequently, 
there has been no occasion for this court to determine the 
limitations of such an exception as set forth in Mincey, 
Thompson, and . 
While consent is a recognized exception to the search 
warrant requirement, an exception is relevant only if there was a Fourth Amendment search.
29 In this case, because Phillips did 
not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the exposed 
interior of his garage, the police officers’ entry into the 
garage did not constitute a Fourth Amendment search. Thus, as 
to the police officers’ entry, it is not appropriate to evaluate 
the applicability of a warrant exception. 
3. The dissent’s approach is a relabeling of the emergency
exception to the warrant requirement 
The “consent” search that the dissent proffers, 
allowing police called to a place to search for victims or 
29 Other jurisdictions, based on an emergency response at a home,
have employed an implied consent analysis. See  McNair v. Virginia,  521 
S.E.2d 303 (Va. Ct. App. 1999) (defendant impliedly consented to a police
search of his home after having called for an emergency response to his home
due to a robbery); State v. Dowling, 387 So. 2d 1165 (La. 1980) (defendants
impliedly consented to police search of home after having called an emergency
response to their home to investigate a shooting). However, as noted, Hawaiʻ i 
has not addressed whether a rticle I, s ection 7 encompasses an emergency 
exception; thus, we have had no reason to apply an implied consent doctrine
to justify police entry into a home. Instead, Roy, Lopez, and Davidsen have 
found police entry into a home lawful when the particular circumstances of
the case demonstrate that the resident lacked a reasonable expectation of
privacy. 
-64 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
perpetrators, originates from Mincey, which held that in 
instances where someone is in need of immediate aid or in 
homicide crime scenes, “the Fourth Amendment does not bar police 
officers from making warrantless entries and searches” and 
allows the police to “make a prompt warrantless search of the 
area to see if there are other victims or if a killer is still 
on the premises.” Mincey v. Arizona, 437 U.S. 385, 392 (1978); 
see also Thompson v. Louisiana, 469 U.S. 17, 21 (1984); Flippo 
v. W. Virginia
, 528 U.S. 11, 14 (1999) (per curiam). The 
dissent appropriates the Mincey victim-or-perpetrator search, 
which is predicated on an emergency exception to the warrant requirement, as the allowable scope of the “consent” search that 
may be conducted at a home or its curtilage by virtue of a 
person’s call for the police to respond to an apparent crime 
scene. Thus, the dissent advocates adoption of an emergency 
exception to the warrant requirement, which this court has never 
accepted and which neither party raised, under the guise of the consent exception. 
This observation is further supported after examining 
the state appellate cases that the dissent relies upon. 
Those 
cases allow police officers called to respond to an apparent crime scene to search the premises to the extent reasonably 
related to the routine investigation of the offense and the 
identification of the perpetrator. See State v. Fleischman, 157 
-65 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Ariz. 11, 15, 754 P.2d 340, 344 (Ct. App. 1988); State v. Brady, 
585 So. 2d 524, 529 (La. 1991); 
State v. Dowling, 387 So. 2d 
1165, 1169 (La. 1980); State v. Fredette, 411 A.2d 65, 69 (Me. 1979). The dissent, however, abandons the holdings of these 
cases as to the allowable scope of a consent search and instead 
suggests that the search should be limited to a Mincey victim-
or-perpetrator search. Consequently, the dissent conflates the 
consent and emergency exceptions, each of which is distinct from the other, in order to create a framework that has never been 
adopted or utilized in this jurisdiction. 
4.	 The dissent’s approach disregards the fact-intensive nature
of consent 
Even if one were to accept the dissent’s consent-
based approach, it is beyond question that the validity of consent is “determined from the totality of circumstances 
surrounding the defendant’s purported relinquishment of a right 
to be free of unreasonable searches and seizures.” State v. 
Russo,
 67 Haw. 126, 137, 681 P.2d 553, 562 (1984). 
The 
dissent’s approach, on the other hand, does away with the case­by-case, fact-specific determination that always accompanies the 
analysis of both the validity and scope of consent searches. 
According to the dissent, in every case in which a person calls 
the police to respond to a home or its curtilage because of an 
apparent crime, the person has effectively consented for the 
-66 ­  
 
   State v. Russo,
                     
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
police to search the premises for the purpose of identifying 
other victims or finding whether the perpetrator is still 
present. Dissent at 20—24, 29—30. Thus, the dissent crafts an 
approach that preordains both the validity and scope of one’s 
consent based singularly on the fact that the occupant of a home 
or its curtilage has called the police to respond to an apparent 
crime, to the exclusion of all other facts and circumstances. 
This approach is in contravention of well-settled canons that have guided courts for decades whenever consent searches are at 
issue. 
See Schneckloth v. Bustamonte , 412 U.S. 218, 226 (1973) 
(explaining that the validity of consent is assessed by “the totality of all the surrounding circumstances” and enumerating 
several factors that may be taken into account in the analysis); 
State v. Won, 137 Hawai i 330, 340, 372 P.3d 1065, 1075 (2015) 
(“In Hawai
i, consent is measured under an analysis examining the 
totality of the circumstances.”);  67 Haw. 126, 
137, 681 P.2d 553, 562 (1984) (accord); State v. Merjil, 65 Haw. 
601, 605, 655 P.2d 864, 868 (1982) (accord). 
Additionally, this court is not in a position to 
determine as a matter of law  the presence and scope of consent 
when it was not litigated in the trial court.30 Whether consent 
30 Also notable is that neither party raised the applicability of
the doctrine of consent to the facts of this case, and hence, this issue is 
not properly before this court. State v. Moses , 102 Hawai i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 
(. . .continued) 
-67 ­  
 
                                                                     
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to search has been given voluntarily under the totality of all 
the circumstances is a question of fact to be determined by the 
trial court. State v. Patterson
, 58 Haw. 462, 468, 571 P.2d 
745, 749 (1977). Consent means that acquiescence to the government’s search must be “in fact, free[] and voluntar[y].” 
Nakamoto v. Fasi , 64 Haw. 17, 21, 635 P.2d 946, 951 (1981). 
On appellate review, the findings of a trier of fact 
regarding the validity of a consent to search must be upheld 
unless clearly erroneous. State v. Ganal , 81 Hawaiʻ i 358, 368, 
917 P.2d 370, 380 (1996). Here, however, the trier of fact made 
no determination regarding the existence or validity of consent 
to a search because consent was never argued at the motion 
(. . .continued) 
940, 947 (2003) (“As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at
trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this ruleapplies in both criminal and civil cases.” (citing 
State v. Ildefonso , 72
Haw. 573, 584, 827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992))). Thus, in order for this court toreach this issue, it would have to be noticed as plain error. While it is 
accepted that an appellate court may affirm a lower court’s judgment on any
ground in the record supportive of affirmance, see  State v. Dow, 96 Hawai i 
320, 326, 30 P.3d 926, 932 (2001), to uphold the circuit court’s ruling as to
Phillips’ motion to suppress unlawful seizure of evidence upon a theory never
presented “would raise serious questions of due process.” 
United States v. 
Parrilla Bonilla,  648 F.2d 1373, 1385
-86 (1st Cir. 1981);  see  Cole v. 
Arkansas, 333 U.S. 196, 202 (1948) (“To conform to due process of law, 
petitioners were entitled to have the validity of their convictions appraised
on consideration of the case as it was tried and as the issues were 
determined in the trial court.”). Notably, Phillips did not testify at the
motion hearing and at the trial. Arguably, however, if the issue of impliedconsent were raised as a legal theory that justified the police conduct in 
this case, Phillips would have been called to testify as to his actions and
the voluntariness of his purported consent in order to refute its existence,
validity, or scope. Accordingly, as Phillips aptly contends, by affirming
the circuit court’s motion to suppress ruling based upon a fact- driven theory 
that was neither raised in nor considered by the circuit court, the dissent
effectively deprives Phillips of the right to meet and defend against
allegations of implied consent, raising “serious questions of due process.” 
-68 ­  
 
                        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
hearing or in the trial court. Thus, in the absence of any 
consideration or a finding by the trial court regarding consent, 
the dissent’s determination that the consent exception to the 
warrant requirement applies to the factual circumstances of this 
case is contrary to the approach of our prior holdings. 
If the dissent were to duly apply the doctrine of 
consent as an exception to the warrant requirement, its 
determination would require vacating that portion of the order denying Phillips’ suppression motion and remanding the case to 
the circuit court for a determination of whether consent had, 
“in fact, [been] freely and voluntarily given.” 
Patterson , 58 
Haw. at 468, 571 P.2d at 749 (1977); see, e.g., State v. 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawaiʻ i 370, 56 P.3d 138 (2002) (holding that 
remand was necessary to give the trial court the opportunity to 
make specific findings on voluntariness because deciding the 
issue on appeal without such findings amounts to the usurpation 
of the factfinder’s role).31 Thus, this court can affirm or 
vacate a finding of free and voluntary consent to a search, but it should not make a determination of consent without providing an opportunity to the parties to provide testimony upon the 
31 See also  Thompson , 469 U.S. at 23 (in response to arguments that 
the search should be upheld as consensual, stating, “Because the issue of
consent is ordinarily a factual issue unsuitable for our consideration in the
first instance, we express no opinion as to whether the search at issue heremight be justified as consensual.”); 
Flippo, 528 U.S. at 15 (making the same 
response to arguments that the search could be upheld under an impliedconsent theory). 
-69 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
issue of consent and without allowing the trial court to make 
relevant factual findings. 
In Russo and Nakamoto, consent was argued at the trial 
court, and the appellate courts’ review considered the factual 
determinations. By contrast, the analysis of the dissent would 
provide as a matter of law that the facts of this case implies 
the consent of a resident to a search of his or her garage for 
the purpose of searching other victims or the perpetrator; this approach is inconsistent with our prior decisions holding that 
consent is a question of fact. 
E. Restitution 
As a result of the injuries sustained in the attack, 
Tara was in a coma when she was admitted to the hospital on the 
morning of September 3, 2008. 
Although she regained 
consciousness, she was never able to live on her own after the 
attack. No evidence at trial or sentencing was presented 
regarding any preexisting conditions or subsequent injuries or 
illnesses that may have caused her death. 
The State requested that Tara’s mother be reimbursed 
for funeral and related expenses. Phillips argued that he 
should not be liable for any additional payment because he had made “very large payments for a couple years to” Tara’s mother, 
Tara died well over a year after the attack, and there was “no 
evidence presented . . . no doctor’s testimony” regarding the 
-70 ­  
 
      
                     
  
 
   
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
cause of death; consequently, he also requested a reduced amount 
of restitution.32 
The circuit court found that Tara “was in a coma,” 
suffered from “head injuries,” “had to be taken to a Florida 
nursing home, and there died. . . . She would not have died but 
for his conduct.” Based on its finding of a nexus between 
Phillips’ actions and Tara’s death, the circuit court awarded 
restitution for funeral expenses under HRS § 706-646.33 The ICA 
did not reach this issue, having ordered suppression of the 
hammer, remanding the case for retrial, and declaring all other 
points on appeal moot. 
HRS § 706-646 requires a court to order restitution 
for “losses suffered by the victim or victims as a result of the 
defendant’s offense.” A party’s conduct “is a legal cause of 
32 Phillips also argues that the parties’ stipulation that Tara’s
death was unrelated to the attack prevents an award to Tara’s mother to
recover funeral related expenses. However, the parties’ stipulation to a
fact for purposes of trial does not supersede the court’s responsibility toindependently determine a relevant factual issue in assessing the
applicability of restitution as part of sentencing. A court’s determination 
of a fact at sentencing, for example, may be premised upon evidence adduced
at sentencing that was not introduced at trial. Consequently, the sentencing
court was not bound by the trial stipulation. 
33 HRS § 706- 646 (2013) provides, in relevant part: 
(2) The court shall order the defendant to make restitution for 
reasonable and verified losses suffered by the victim or victims as a result
of the defendant’s offense when requested by the victim. . . . 
(3) . . . Restitution shall be a dollar amount that is sufficient to 
reimburse any victim fully for losses, including but not limited to . . .[m]edical expenses [and] [f]uneral and burial expenses incurred as a result 
of the crime.” 
-71 ­  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
harm to another if . . . his conduct is a substantial factor in 
bringing about the harm.” Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel,  
Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 390, 742 P.2d 377, 386 (1987) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 431 (Am. Law. Inst. 1965)). The 
conduct “need not have been the whole cause or the only factor . 
. . bringing about the . . . plaintiff’s injuries,” id. (quoting 
Mitchell v. Branch, 45 Haw. 128, 132, 363 P.2d 969, 973 (1961)), 
but some “nexus” is required in order to award restitution under 
HRS § 706-646. State v. Domingo, 121 Hawaiʻ i 191, 195, 216 P.3d 
117, 121 (App. 2009) (holding that where nexus was lacking, 
restitution could not be imposed). 
To determine whether a sufficient nexus exists for the 
application of HRS § 706-646, a court must determine whether the evidence supports a finding that the defendant’s conduct was the 
cause of or aggravated the victim’s loss. 
Id. at 195, 216 P.3d 
at 121 (“Absent evidence that [defendant’s] conduct caused or aggravated [victim’s] injuries or caused [victim’s] death, no 
causal relationship between [defendant’s] criminal act and a 
victim’s losses is shown and restitution may not be imposed pursuant to HRS § 706–646.”). 
A constitutionally valid sentence is reviewed for a 
plain and manifest abuse of discretion. 
State v. Kumukau , 71 
Haw. 218, 227, 787 P.2d 682, 686 (1990). In this case, the evidence at trial and at sentencing plainly demonstrated a 
-72 ­  
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
sufficient nexus between Phillips’ attack on Tara and her 
subsequent death, providing the requisite basis for the circuit 
court to order restitution for Tara’s funeral-related expenses. 
Thus, the circuit court’s award of restitution was not an abuse 
of discretion. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Analysis under our search and seizure jurisprudence 
proceeds in a logical manner, and the proper starting point for a search and seizure analysis is whether a constitutionally 
proscribed search occurred. 
A search in the constitutional 
sense occurs when, under  Katz, the government invades a person’s 
reasonable expectation of privacy or when, under Jones and 
Jardines, the government physically intrudes--that is, enters 
without permission--a constitutionally protected area for the purpose of collecting evidence. Here, the police officers that 
Phillips summoned into his garage did not invade any reasonable 
expectation of privacy. Further, police did not physically 
intrude into Phillips’ garage with the intent to gather 
evidence. Because there was no search related to the entry of 
the garage, exceptions to the search warrant requirement, such 
as consent, are not pertinent to the analysis. 
While the police were lawfully in the garage 
conducting their initial check of the residence following a reported home invasion and a brutal assault, the hammer was 
-73 ­  
 
    
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
observed by HPD officers in plain view, and there was probable 
cause to seize it. Thus, the hammer was recovered as a valid 
plain-view seizure. With respect to the clothing, there was 
clear and convincing evidence that it would have been inevitably 
discovered under the authority and scope of the search warrant 
that the police later obtained that day; thus, the warrantless 
seizure of the clothing from the inside of the closed garbage 
bin within Phillips’ garage was lawful. 
Lastly, because there was a sufficient nexus between 
Phillips’ actions and the expenses incurred by Tara’s family, the circuit court did not err in its restitution order. 
Consequently, the ICA Judgment on Appeal is reversed, 
and the circuit court’s amended judgment of conviction is 
affirmed. 
Stephen K. Tsushima 
for petitioner /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
Randall K. Hironaka for respondent  
/s/ Rhonda A. Nishimura 
-74 ­