     ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000416 14-DEC-2012 
09:04 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
ALDEN JAMES ARQUETTE,
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, STEPHEN H. LEVINS, and MICHAEL J.S. MORIYAMA,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants.
 
SCWC-11-0000416
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000416; CIV. NO. 08-1-0118)
 
December 14, 2012
 
NAKAYAMA, ACTING C.J, ACOBA, MCKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ., AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE CRANDALL, IN PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, C.J., RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold, first, that a plaintiff may bring an action in
 
tort for the maintenance of a malicious prosecution as well as
 
for the initiation of a malicious prosecution. 
Second, we hold
 
1
that the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (the court)  properly
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
         
   
     
       
       
      
       
      
        
     
        
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
granted the December 24, 2009 motion for summary judgment filed 
by Respondents/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants State of Hawai'i (the State), Stephen H. Levins (Levins), and Michael J.S. 
Moriyama (Moriyama) (collectively, Respondents) with respect to the claim of Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Alden James Arquette (Petitioner) for initiation of a malicious prosecution, because there was no genuine issue of material fact that Moriyama had probable cause to file a complaint against Petitioner and that Moriyama did not act with malice. Third, we conclude that although the court did not recognize a cause of action for maintenance of a malicious prosecution, the court properly granted Respondents’ April 12, 2010 motion for summary judgment, because there was no genuine issue of material fact that Moriyama maintained the prosecution with probable cause and without malice. Fourth, Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 487-1 
2
(2008) does not set forth a standard of care in a claim for
negligence. 
Fifth, we reaffirm that when denying costs to the
 
prevailing party, the court must state its reasons for doing so
 
2 HRS § 487-1 states:
 
Legislative Intent . The public health, welfare
and interest require a strong and effective consumer
protection program to protect the interests of both
the consumer public and the legitimate business
person. Toward this end, a permanent office of
consumer protection is created to coordinate the
services offered to the consumer by various state and
county agencies, together with private organizations,
and to aid in the development of preventive and
remedial programs affecting the interest of the
consumer public.
 
2
         
           
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
on the record, and therefore the court erred in failing to state
 
its rationale for granting in part Petitioner’s July 28, 2010
 Motion for Review and/or to Set Aside Taxation of Costs (Motion
 for Review of Costs). Finally, we conclude that the Intermediate
 Court of Appeals (ICA) did not abuse its discretion in denying
 Petitioner’s November 29, 2011 Motion for Recusal of Substitute
 Judge, the Honorable Associate Judge Katherine G. Leonard (Motion
 for Recusal), because the facts as alleged were insufficient to
 warrant her recusal.
 
For the reasons stated herein, we affirm in part and
 
vacate in part the court’s April 19, 2011 Amended Final Judgment. 
We affirm the Amended Final Judgment with respect to the court’s
 March 29, 2010 and June 30, 2010 orders granting summary
 judgment, but for the reasons stated herein, and we vacate the
 court’s Amended Final Judgment with respect to its August 23,
 2010 Order Granting Plaintiff’s Motion for Review of Costs (Order
 Granting Costs) and remand for review of Respondents’ taxation of
 costs. Therefore, we affirm the August 10, 2012 judgment of the
 ICA filed pursuant to its July 12, 2012 Summary Disposition
 Order, but based on the reasons stated herein.
3 Additionally, we
 
affirm the ICA’s December 6, 2011 order denying Petitioner’s
 Motion for Recusal.
 
3
 The SDO was filed by Presiding Judge Daniel R. Foley and Associate
 
Judges Alexa D.M. Fujise and Katherine G. Leonard.
 
3
         
    
    
       
        
    
       
       
      
        
      
        
 
        
        
       
       
  
       
        
       
      
   
        
      
 
      
  
       
        
    
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
I. 
A.
 
Respondents initiated an action on July 19, 2004 (2004
 
action), against Petitioner and others, based on an investigation
 
conducted by the Office of Consumer Protection (OCP). The
 complaint alleged, inter alia, that Petitioner had participated
 in a scheme to sell long term deferred annuities to elderly
 consumers through unfair or deceptive acts or practices in
 
4 5
violation of HRS §§ 480-2 (1993 & Supp. 2002) ,  481A-3 (1993)  , 
4 HRS § 480-2 provides:
 
Unfair competition, practices, declared unlawful.
(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or
deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any
trade or commerce are unlawful.
 
(b) In construing this section, the courts and
the office of consumer protection shall give due
consideration to the rules, regulations, and decisions
of the Federal Trade Commission and the federal courts
 interpreting section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade
Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1)), as from time to
time amended.
 
(c) No showing that the proceeding or suit would
be in the public interest (as these terms are
interpreted under section 5(b) of the Federal Trade
Commission Act) is necessary in any action brought
under this section.
 
(d) No person other than a consumer, the
attorney general or the director of the office of
consumer protection may bring an action based upon
unfair or deceptive acts or practices declared
unlawful by this section.
(e) Any person may bring an action based on
unfair methods of competition declared unlawful by
this section.
 
5
 HRS § 481A-3 provides, in pertinent part:
 
Deceptive trade practices.
(a) A person engages in a deceptive trade
practice when, in the course of the person's business,
vocation, or occupation, the person:
 
.
. . .
 
(continued...)
 
4
         
    
      
    
  
    
     
    
  
    
   
  
      
       
   
      
    
     
      
 
     
     
   
         
      
      
              
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and other statutory provisions. Respondents identified several
 
individuals, including Limuel and Hazel Cherry (the Cherrys) and
 other consumers as the target of Petitioner’s alleged scheme. As
 alleged by Respondents in the complaint, the scheme involved
 Petitioner, insurance agent Dan Fox, attorney Rodwin Wong and
 others using Rodwin Wong’s name and law practice on mailings
 offering information about elder law to solicit consumers. 
Individuals who responded to the mailings were then contacted at
 their homes where Petitioner and others falsely identified
 themselves as “paralegals” working for Rodwin Wong in order to
 
5(...continued)
 
(2) Causes likelihood of confusion
or of misunderstanding as to the source,
sponsorship, approval, or certification of
goods or services;
(3) 
C
auses likelihood of confusion
or of misunderstanding as to affiliation,
connection, or association with, or
certification by, another;
 
. . . .
  
(
5) R
epresents that goods or
services have sponsorship, approval,
characteristics, ingredients, uses,
benefits, or quantities that they do not
have or that a person has a sponsorship,
approval, status, affiliation, or
connection that the person does not have;
 
. . . .
  
(
11) Makes false or misleading
statements of fact concerning the reasons
for, existence of, or amounts of price
reductions; or
(12) Engages in any other conduct
which similarly creates a likelihood of
confusion or of misunderstanding.
(b) In order to prevail in an action under this
chapter, a complainant need not prove competition
between the parties or actual confusion or
misunderstanding.
(c) This section does not affect unfair trade
practices otherwise actionable at common law or under
other statutes of this State.
 
5
         
         
  
         
     
     
              
        
          
         
           
        
        
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
obtain personal and confidential financial information from them. 
Based on this information, Petitioner and others allegedly sold
 or attempted to sell long term annuities to these consumers while
 failing to provide them with information necessary to make
 decisions in their best interest and “engag[ing] in conduct which
 created a likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding.”
 
6
On December 21, 2005, the court  filed an order
granting Petitioner’s motion for partial summary judgment on the claims pertaining to the Cherrys.
7 On December 22, 2005, the 
court granted in part and denied in part, Petitioner’s motion for summary judgment on the claims pertaining to the other consumers. On May 16, 2006, the court denied Moriyama’s motion to continue trial, and ordered a severance of the trial as to Petitioner. Petitioner and Respondents stipulated to dismiss the remaining claims against Petitioner pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
8
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 41(a)(1)(B)  and the court filed a
6 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided over the 2004 action
 
underlying Petitioner’s claim.
 
7 This order was granted on the basis of res judicata.
 
8 Rule 41 provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) Voluntary dismissal: Effect thereof.
(1) By plaintiff; by stipulation. An action may
be dismissed by the plaintiff without order of court
(A) by filing a notice of dismissal at any time before
the return date as provided in Rule 12(a) or service
by the adverse party of an answer or of a motion for
summary judgment, or (B) by filing a stipulation of
dismissal signed by all parties who have appeared in
the action, in the manner and form prescribed by Rule
(continued...)
 
6
         
         
       
       
        
          
        
       
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Stipulation for Dismissal Without Prejudice on June 26, 2006. 
B.
 
Petitioner then filed the present action against
 
Respondents on January 17, 2008. His allegations were based on
 
the facts as recited above, and in his complaint, he alleged that
 Respondents were liable for malicious prosecution, negligent
 investigation, negligent failure to train and/or supervise, and
 punitive damages arising from the initiation and maintenance of
 the 2004 action. Petitioner sued Moriyama in his individual and
 official capacities for negligent investigation and malicious
 prosecution. In addition, Petitioner sued Levins in his
 individual and official capacities, as well as the State, for
 negligent failure to train and/or supervise Moriyama. 
Respondents answered the complaint on May 29, 2008, and discovery
 commenced in the case, including requests for production of
 documents, interrogatories, and depositions. 
On December 24, 2009, Respondents filed their first
 
motion for summary judgment on Petitioner’s claims pertaining to
 the initiation of the prosecution in the 2004 action, and on
 
8(...continued)
4
1.1 of these rules. Unless otherwise stated in the
 
notice of dismissal or stipulation, the dismissal is
without prejudice, except that a notice of dismissal
operates as an adjudication upon the merits when filed
by a plaintiff who has once dismissed in any court of
the United States, or of any state, territory or
insular possession of the United States an action
based on or including the same claim.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
         
          
      
         
            
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
February 22, 2010, Petitioner filed a memorandum in opposition. 
The court issued an order granting in part Respondents’ first
 motion for summary judgment with respect to the negligent
 supervision and training claims against the State and Levins,
9 as
 
to the negligent investigation claim against Moriyama, and as to
 the initiation of a malicious prosecution claim against Moriyama. 
The court denied in part Respondents’ first motion for summary
 judgment.
10 The court noted that it had not ruled on
 
Petitioner’s claim that Moriyama was liable for maintaining a
 malicious prosecution.
 
On April 12, 2010, Respondents filed a second motion
 
for summary judgment on Petitioner’s claims pertaining to the
 maintenance of the prosecution in the underlying action. 
Petitioner filed his opposition to the motion on June 4, 2010,
 and Respondents filed a reply on June 10, 2010. On July 30,
 2010, the court issued an order granting Respondents’ second
 motion for summary judgment as to Petitioner’s claims pertaining
 to the maintenance of the prosecution in the 2004 action. 
On July 2, 2010, Respondents filed a Notice of Taxation
 
of Costs pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d) and HRS § 607-9 (1993). 
Respondents asked the court to require Petitioner to pay for the
 
9 Petitioner did not appeal the court’s ruling as to the negligent
 
supervision claims against Levins and the State.
 
10 The court denied Respondents’ first motion for summary judgment as
 
to “Doe defendants” who were not identified at the time the complaint was
 
filed. The “Doe defendants” are not at issue in this case.
 
8
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
costs of mediation, of depositions of certain persons, and of the
 
transcript of the first motion for summary judgment hearing. On
 July 13, 2010, Petitioner filed his Motion for Review of Costs. 
Respondents filed a Memorandum in Opposition to Petitioner’s
 Motion for Review of Costs. On August 23, 2010, the court
 granted in part and denied in part Petitioner’s Motion. The
 court entered final judgment in favor of Respondents on September
 2, 2010 as to Moriyama in his official and individual capacities,
 Levins in his official and individual capacities, and the State. 
C.
 
Petitioner filed a Notice of Appeal to the ICA on May
 
18, 2011. On November 29, 2011, Petitioner filed his Motion for
 Recusal, requesting that Judge Leonard be recused from the ICA
 panel. The ICA entered an order denying Petitioner’s Motion for
 Recusal on December 6, 2011. 
II.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Petitioner argued that the court 
erred (1) in concluding that Respondents established probable cause to initiate the 2004 prosecution of Petitioner, (2) in deciding that HRS § 487-1 does not create an actionable duty of care to support a claim for negligence, and (3) in holding that Hawai'i does not recognize a tort action for maintaining a 
prosecution when probable cause to continue no longer exists. 
9
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondents filed a Cross-Appeal to the ICA (Cross-Appeal),
 
seeking a reversal of the court’s Order Granting Costs in part.
 
With respect to Petitioner’s first argument, the ICA
 
upheld the court’s grant of summary judgment, concluding that
 Respondents had probable cause to initiate a prosecution. 
Arquette v. State, No. CAAP-11-0000416, 2012 WL 2864352, at *1
 (App. July 12, 2012) (SDO). According to the ICA, Respondents
 presented sufficient evidence to indicate they had an honest and
 reasonable belief that there was probable cause to initiate the
 2004 action, based on a declaration by Moriyama and evidence that
 Petitioner’s business cards and letterhead identified Petitioner
 as a paralegal for attorney Rodwin Wong, but listed the address
 and phone number of Dan Fox’s insurance sales company which was,
 at the time, under investigation by the OCP. Id. at *2. 
In addressing Petitioner’s second argument, the ICA
 
affirmed the court’s determination that HRS § 487-1 did not
 create a private right of action. Id. at *3. The determinative
 
factor, the ICA noted, was that there was no legislative history
 establishing a private right of action in HRS § 487-1. Id.
 
The ICA also rejected Petitioner’s third argument, 
holding that Hawai' i does not recognize the tort of maintaining a 
malicious prosecution. Id. The ICA explained that Young v. 
Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai' i 403, 198 P.3d 666 (2008), “clearly 
10
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
indicates that malicious prosecution is limited to the initiation
 
of an action against a defendant.” Id. 
Lastly, the ICA noted that although “‘[t]he award of 
taxable cost is within the discretion of the circuit court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion[,]’” id. at *4 (quoting Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 10–11, 
143 P.3d 1205, 1212–13 (2006)), the court “abused its discretion when it reduced the amount of taxable costs without adequate explanation or a readily discernable rationale in the record.” Id. (citing Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 
617 (1998)). 
III.
 
Petitioner presents the following questions in his
 
Application, “[1] [d]id the ICA gravely err in holding that a
 prosecution continued without probable cause would not support a
 cause of action for malicious prosecution? [;] [2] [d]id the ICA
 gravely err in finding that, taking all the facts and reasonable
 inferences in the light most favorable to [Petitioner], there was
 probable cause to initiate the prosecutions? [;] [3] [d]id the
 ICA gravely err in misconstruing [Petitioner’s] argument that HRS
 § 487-1 stated a standard of care? [;] [4] [d]id the ICA gravely
 err in overturning the [court’s] discretionary decision to deny
 [Respondent’s] costs that were not statutorily authorized or 
11
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonably necessary?[; and] [5] [d]id the ICA gravely err in
 
denying [Petitioner’s] Motion For Recusal of Substitute Judge?”
 
On October 22, 2012, Respondents filed a Response to
 
Petitioner’s Application (Response).
 
IV.
 
A.
 
We hold that continuing to prosecute an action without
 
probable cause is included in the tort of malicious prosecution. 
The ICA held that Young “clearly indicates that [the tort of]
 malicious prosecution is limited to the initiation of an action
 against a defendant.” Arquette, 2012 WL 2864352, at *3. 
However, in Young, this court addressed the tort of malicious
 defense, not malicious prosecution. Although some dicta in the
 case may suggest that the tort of malicious prosecution is
 limited, Young does not decide the issue raised in the instant
 case. Instead, whether the tort of malicious prosecution
 includes maintaining a prosecution in the absence of probable
 cause is a matter of first impression.
 
In Young, inter alia, this court declined to recognize 
the tort of malicious defense. 119 Hawai' i at 416, 198 P.3d at 
679. The Young court analogized the malicious defense tort to
 
the tort of malicious prosecution, stating that “it is not
 appropriate to derive the tort of malicious defense from the tort
 of malicious prosecution where the tort of malicious prosecution
 
12
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
remedies harms resulting from the initiation of a lawsuit.” Id.
 
(emphasis in original). Although this language appears to
 
suggest that malicious prosecution is restricted to actions
 stemming from the initiation of the lawsuit, that interpretation
 is inapposite given the context of the case. 
When Young emphasizes the importance of initiating a
 
lawsuit for purposes of the malicious prosecution tort, this
 court is emphasizing the difference between a situation in which
 the defendant has wrongfully initiated a lawsuit and a situation
 where the defendant has wrongfully defended him or herself in an
 existing lawsuit. See id. at 418, 198 P.3d at 681 (“The tort of
 
malicious prosecution acknowledges the special, particular harms
 that a defendant suffers when a lawsuit is maliciously initiated
 against it.”). Thus, the focus of this court was on the status
 of the parties, and it was simply contrasting the plaintiff, who
 initiates a suit, with the defendant, who responds to a suit. 
The decision further states that “[b]ecause a malicious
 
prosecution claim is triggered when the unsuccessful party
 initiated the lawsuit, ‘the defendant is not liable for
 proceedings unless he has initiated them.’” Id. at 417, 198 P.3d
 
at 680 (quoting Prosser and Keeton on Torts § 120, at 893 (5th
 ed., W. Page Keeton, et al. eds., 1984)) (brackets omitted). 
Here, again, this court was distinguishing between the two
 parties and not explicitly limiting the “trigger[ing]” of a
 
13
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
malicious prosecution to when a lawsuit is initiated. Id. The 
question of when a defendant may bring a claim for malicious 
prosecution was not at issue in Young. Thus, the cases cited in Young setting forth the elements of a malicious prosecution, including that a plaintiff must show that the prior proceedings were “initiated by the defendant without probable cause, and [] initiated by the defendant with malice[,]” id. at 430, 198 P.3d 
at 693 (citing Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 478, 143 P.3d 
1, 17 (2006)) (emphasis added), are not controlling as to whether this court may consider a continuation of the tort beyond initiation of a prosecution. In sum, Young has no preclusive effect on whether this court should now recognize a tort for maintaining a malicious prosecution. 
B.
 
It is well-established that this court may recognize a 
new cause of action in tort. Fergerstrom v. Hawaiian Ocean View 
Estates, 50 Haw. 374, 375, 441 P.2d 141, 142 (1968) (holding that this court could adopt a cause of action for invasion of privacy, despite the fact that neither the ancient common law nor prior Hawai'i case law recognized the right). The purpose underlying 
the tort of malicious prosecution is to protect “the interest in freedom from unjustifiable litigation.” Young, 119 Hawai' i at 
418, 198 P.3d at 681 (quoting Prosser and Keeton on Torts § 119, at 870) (brackets omitted). Although litigation may be warranted 
14
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in the eyes of the plaintiff at its commencement, if that
 
plaintiff becomes aware that the litigation is no longer
 justified, then the plaintiff should terminate the litigation. 
Indeed, “litigation ‘has a profound effect upon the quality of
 one’s life that goes beyond the mere entitlement to counsel
 fees.’” Id. at 421, 198 P.3d at 684 (quoting Aranson v.
 
Schroeder, 671 A.2d 1023, 1028 (N.H. 1995)). 
If a plaintiff fails to terminate litigation when he or
 
she knows it would be appropriate to do so, then the same harms
 are inflicted on the defendant’s quality of life that would have
 been inflicted if the plaintiff knew that the litigation was
 unjustified in the first instance. In order to properly guard
 against the harms associated with protracted litigation, the tort
 of maintaining malicious prosecution should be recognized. 
Moreover, many of the reasons that this court
 
enumerated in Young for rejecting the tort of malicious defense
 are inapplicable to the tort of maintaining a malicious
 prosecution. In Young, the court noted that “the malicious
 defense tort is ‘unfamiliar, if known at all[,]’” id. at 417, 198
 P.3d at 680 (quoting Jonathan K. Van Patten & Robert E. Willard,
 The Limits of Advocacy: A Proposal for the Tort of Malicious
 Defense in Civil Litigation, 35 Hastings L.J. 891, 893 (1984)),
 and that only one jurisdiction, New Hampshire, had recognized it. 
Id. at 418, 198 P.3d at 682. While not dispositive, this factor
 
15
         
     
        
     
        
    
       
        
       
      
        
       
    
        
           
   
       
        
      
       
       
       
      
       
       
       
       
      
      
        
        
        
         
       
      
       
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was relevant in this court’s decision not to extend Hawai' i tort 
law. Unlike the malicious defense tort that has limited
 
acceptance, a cause of action for continuing a malicious
 prosecution has been recognized in the Restatement (Second) of
 
11  1 2
 Torts, and by a substantial number of states.  Although not
 
controlling, the recognition in other jurisdictions is
 
11 Section 674 of the Restatement provides:
 
One who takes an active part in the initiation,
continuation or procurement of civil proceedings
against another is subject to liability to the other
for wrongful civil proceedings if
(a) he acts without probable cause, and
primarily for a purpose other than that of
securing the proper adjudication of the claim
in which the proceedings are based, and
(b) except when they are ex parte, the
proceedings have terminated in favor of the person
against whom they are brought.
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 674 (emphasis added).
 
12 As the California Supreme Court noted in Zamos v. Stroud , 87 P.3d
 
802, 808 (Cal. 2004):
 
The Restatement's position on this question has been
adopted or was anticipated by the courts of a
substantial number of states: Alabama ( Laney v.
Glidden Co., Inc. [,] []194 So. 849, 851–852 [(Ala.
1940)]); Arizona ( Smith v. Lucia [,] []842 P.2d 1303,
1308 [(Ariz. Ct. App. 1992)]); Arkansas ( McLaughlin v.
Cox[,] []922 S.W.2d 327, 331–332 [(Ark. 1996)]);
Colorado ( Slee v. Simpson [,] []15 P.2d 1084, 1085
[(Colo. 1932)]); Idaho ( Badell v. Beeks [,] []P.2d 126,
128 [(Idaho 1988)]); Iowa ( Wilson v. Hayes [,] 464
N.W.2d 250, 264 [(Iowa 1990)]); Kansas ( Nelson v.
Miller[,] []607 P.2d 438, 447–448 [(Kan. 1980)]);
Mississippi ( Benjamin v. Hooper Electronic Supply Co.,
Inc.[,] []568 So. 2d 1182, 1189, fn. 6 [(Miss.
1990)]); New York ( Broughton v. State of New York [,]
[]335 N.E.2d 310 [(N.Y. 1975)]); Ohio ( Siegel v. O.M.
Scott & Sons Co. [,] []56 N.E.2d 345, 347 [(Ohio Ct.
App. 1943)]); Oregon ( Wroten v. Lenske [,] []835 P.2d
931, 933–934 [(Or. 1992)]); Pennsylvania ( Wenger v.
Philips [,] []45 A. 927 [(Pa. 1900)]); and Washington
(Banks v. Nordstrom, Inc. [,] []787 P.2d 953, 956–957
[(Wash. 1990)]).
 
16
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
instructive as to whether a new cause of action should be adopted 
in Hawai' i. As this court stated in Fergerstrom, “[w]e are 
disinclined to decide an important issue merely on the basis of the number of states adopting a given approach. But some weight must be accorded to the overwhelming recognition of a common law right of privacy by all but a few states.” 50 Haw. at 375, 441 P.2d at 143. 
Respondents counter that allowing a cause of action for 
continuing a malicious prosecution would promote lawsuits ad infinitum. (Citing Brodie v. Hawai' i Auto. Retail Gasoline 
Dealers Ass’n, 2 Haw. App. 316, 321, 631 P.2d 600, 604 (1981), rev’d on other grounds, 65 Haw. 598, 655 P.2d 863 (1982).) However, it would no more promote lawsuits than this court’s current conception of the tort of malicious prosecution. In its reasoning for rejecting the tort of malicious defense, Young states that “[p]ermitting a plaintiff to bring a second lawsuit against the same party as the underlying case where other workable remedies exist may allow such plaintiff to recover twice against the defendant and needlessly burden the already overworked judicial system.” Young, 119 Hawai' i at 424, 198 P.3d 
at 687. 
In contrast, recognizing the tort of maintaining a
 
malicious prosecution would not allow any additional recovery,
 but would provide a remedy to those litigants who may have been
 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
brought into court on the basis of good faith, but who were 
maliciously kept there. Further, as in bringing a claim for initiating malicious prosecution, a complainant would have to premise his or her claim for maintaining a malicious prosecution on narrowly construed elements. As with the tort of initiating malicious prosecution, the tort of maintaining malicious prosecution would not chill zealous advocacy, because liability would only attach when the plaintiff maliciously maintains an unreasonable claim. See id., at 431, 198 P.3d at 694 (Levinson, 
J., dissenting) (citing Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i at 483, 143 P.3d at 
22 (reiterating that malice is an essential element that the complainant must demonstrate in order to maintain an action for malicious prosecution)). 
Additionally, the existing rules and statutes do not
 
fully remedy the harms inflicted by protracted litigation. As
 the Court of Appeal in California pointed out when addressing
 this issue, “‘[h]olding attorneys liable for the damages a party
 incurs as a result of the attorneys prosecuting civil claims
 after they learn the claims have no merit will [] encourage
 voluntary dismissals of meritless claims at the earliest stage
 possible[,] . . . [and] the attorney will serve the client’s
 best interests in that the client will avoid the cost of
 fruitless litigation[.]’” Zamos, 87 P.3d at 809-10 (quoting
 
Zamos v. Stroud, 1 Cal. Rptr. 3d 484, 494 (Cal. Ct. App. 2003)). 
18
         
         
       
       
       
      
        
      
   
              
        
        
            
       
      
        
   
           
     
      
      
    
            
       
       
   
       
      
       
       
       
       
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Although the conduct associated with continuing a malicious
 
prosecution is subject to sanctions under HRCP Rule 11
 
13
 attorneys fees may not
 (permitting recovery of attorneys fees),  always provide a complete remedy to a litigant whose reputation
 may have been damaged. See Young
, 119 Hawai' i at 418, 198 P.3d 
at 681 (citing Stanley v. Superior Court, 181 Cal.Rptr. 878, 882
 (Cal. Ct. App. 1982)). Furthermore, “[s]omewhere along the line,
 the rights of the defendant to be free from costly and harassing
 litigation must be considered. So too must the time and energies
 
13 See, e.g., HRCP Rule 11 which states, in pertinent part:
 
(b) Representations to court. By presenting to
the court (whether by signing, filing, submitting, or
later advocating) a pleading, written motion, or other
paper, an attorney or unrepresented party is
certifying that to the best of the person's knowledge,
information, and belief, formed after an inquiry
reasonable under the circumstances:
 
(1) it is not being presented for any improper
purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary
delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation;
(2) the claims, defenses, and other legal
contentions therein are warranted by existing law or
by a nonfrivolous argument for the extension,
modification, or reversal of existing law or the
establishment of new law;
(3) the allegations and other factual
contentions have evidentiary support or, if
specifically so identified, are likely to have
evidentiary support after a reasonable opportunity for
further investigation or discovery; and
(4) the denials of factual contentions are
warranted on the evidence or, if specifically so
identified, are reasonably based on a lack of
information or belief.
 
(c)
Sanctions. If, after notice and a reasonable
opportunity to respond, the court determines that
subdivision (b) has been violated, the court may,
subject to the conditions stated below, impose an
appropriate sanction upon the attorneys, law firms, or
parties that have violated subdivision (b) or are
responsible for the violation.
 
19
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of our courts and the rights of would be litigants awaiting their
 
turns to have other matters resolved.” Ellis v. Harland
 
Bartholomew & Assocs., 1 Haw. App. 420, 428, 620 P.2d 744, 750
 (1980) (citation omitted).
 
C.
 
A workable standard for continuation of malicious 
prosecution is easily garnered from the elements that must be shown to prove the initiation of a malicious prosecution. Thus, the standard for continuing a malicious prosecution would be (1) that the prior proceedings were terminated in the plaintiff’s favor, (2) that the prior proceedings were maintained without probable cause, and (3) that the prior proceedings were maintained with malice. See Zamos, 87 P.3d at 810 (with a 
similar test for initiating malicious prosecution as Hawai' i, 
applying the same standard to the continuation as to the initiation of a suit). Hence, a claim for continuation of malicious prosecution could be brought under circumstances in which an attorney has taken affirmative action toward continuance of a prosecution, despite the fact that the attorney knows he or she lacks probable cause to do so, and that the attorney is motivated by malice. 
Although the tort of malicious prosecution is “‘not
 
generally favored in our legal system, and thus its requirements
 are construed strictly against the party bringing the action,’”
 
20
         
   
       
            
            
             
              
             
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Young, 119 Hawai' i at 419, 192 P.3d at 682 (quoting Wong v. 
Tabor, 422 N.E.2d 1279, 1283 (Ind. Ct. App. 1981)), the tort of 
the continuation of a malicious prosecution is not an unwarranted enlargement of the current doctrine but, rather, logically stems from the policies underlying the tort. 
V.
 
With respect to Petitioner’s second question, “‘[t]here
 
are three essential elements in a claim for [initiating]
 malicious prosecution: (1) that the prior proceedings were
 terminated in the plaintiff’s favor, (2) that the prior
 proceedings were initiated without probable cause, and (3) that
 the prior proceedings were initiated with malice.’” Myers v.
 
Cohen, 67 Haw. 389, 391, 688 P.2d 1145, 1148 (1984) (quoting
 Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 318, 631 P.2d at 602) (other citation
 omitted) (emphasis added). Accordingly, in a valid claim for
 initiating a malicious prosecution, all three elements must be
 satisfied. In his Application to this court, Petitioner
 challenged the ICA’s holding that the court properly granted
 Respondents’ motion for summary judgment on the issue of whether
 there was probable cause to initiate the prosecution.
14
 
14
 “‘Unlike other appellate matters, in reviewing summary judgment 
decisions an appellate court steps into the shoes of the trial court and
applies the same legal standard as the trial court applies.’” Blaisdell v. 
Dep’t of Pub. Safety , 119 Hawai 'i 275, 284, 196 P.3d 277, 282 (2008) (quoting
Beamer v. Nishiki , 66 Haw. 572, 577, 670 P.2d 1264, 1270 (1983)). “This court 
reviews a circuit court’s grant or denial of summary judgment de novo .” Id. 
(citations omitted). 
(continued...)
 
21
         
        
   
      
 
     
       
    
      
       
      
      
      
    
       
          
         
           
        
       
         
  
           
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
The issue of probable cause for initiation of the
 
prosecution was addressed most extensively in the proceedings and
 
is considered first. Probable cause in a malicious prosecution
 action depends “not on the actual state of the facts but upon the
 honest and reasonable belief of the party commencing the action.” 
Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 318, 631 P.2d at 602 (citations omitted). 
[P]robable cause for the filing of a lawsuit exists
where a person:
 
r
easonably believes in the existence of the
 
facts
 
upon  which  the  claim  is  based,  and  either
 
(
a) correctly or reasonably believes that
under those facts the claim may be valid
under the applicable law, or
 
(b) believes to this effect in reliance
upon the advice of counsel, sought in good
faith and given after full disclosure of
all relevant facts within his knowledge or
information.
 
Id. at 319, 631 P.2d at 602 (quoting Restatement (Second) of
 
Torts § 675 (1977)). The determination as to whether a
 particular party had probable cause is both a subjective and
 
14(...continued)
[
S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together, with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law . A fact is material if
 
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.
 
Id. (emphasis in original) (quoting Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui , 116 Hawai 'i 
239, 254-55, 172 P.3d 983, 998-99 (2007)) (citations omitted)). 
22
         
         
           
          
        
       
       
        
            
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
objective question. See, e.g., Bertero v. Nat’l. Gen. Corp., 118
 
Cal. Rptr. 184, 193 (1974); Williams v. City of New York, 508
 
F.2d 356, 359 (1974). The first question is whether the party
 had the subjective belief that he or she possessed probable cause
 in the underlying action. The second question is whether that
 belief was reasonable. 
B. 
Respondents argued in their Memorandum in Support of
 
their first motion for summary judgment that “[a]ll the
 evidence[] . . . establishes that, based on the information known
 to Moriyama at the time he filed suit in July 2004, he had a
 reasonable basis for initiating [the 2004 action] against
 [Petitioner].”
15 In support of this allegation, Respondents
 
attached Moriyama’s declaration stating that at the time the
 action was filed, Petitioner and other defendants had been the
 subject of an ongoing investigation for several years, and which
 had shown Petitioner was involved with a group of insurance
 salespeople who referred to themselves as “paralegals.” 
According to Moriyama, he had information in 2004 based
 
on interviews with consumers that these salespeople were selling
 
15
 The complaint against Petitioner in the 2004 action alleged, inter
 
alia, that he committed deceptive acts in falsely representing himself as a
paralegal, operating under the guise of estate planning, failing to provide
required information to consumers regarding replacement insurance or annuity
contracts, misrepresenting the suitability or appropriateness of selling
securities and purchasing deferred annuities, engaging in unlicensed
securities transactions, acting as an unlicensed investment adviser, employing
high pressure sales tactics, and targeting the elderly, in violation of HRS §§
480-2, 481A-3, and other statutory provisions.
 
23
         
        
          
           
          
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
deferred annuities to elderly citizens in Hawai' i, and that OCP 
had “initially identified thirty-three [] consumers who: 1) 
Within the previous four [] years at the time had purchased or signed applications to purchase annuities through Dan Fox or others working with Dan Fox, and 2) Were in their seventies [] or eighties [] at the time.” Respondents provided a list of these thirty-three alleged consumers. Moriyama stated that at the time the lawsuit was filed, “OCP knew four [] individuals or couples who dealt with [Petitioner] and would be identified as witnesses ([the] Arrudas, James Gamache, [the] Paakaulas, and [the] Pachecos).” Moriyama further averred that after filing the lawsuit, four additional consumers who reported that they dealt with [Petitioner] either complained to OCP or were referred to 
16
 , and Blanche Schwarz).  
 OCP (James Ah Nee, the Cherrys 
As an example of the pattern which Petitioner and other
 
defendants allegedly engaged in, Moriyama stated that James
 Gamache related that Petitioner “explained the ‘system’ and took
 the check payable to Rodwin Wong” from James Gamache. 
Respondents provided a copy of a receipt given to James Gamache
 signed by Petitioner on a line marked “Paralegal Signature” and
 
16
 Petitioner included a declaration attached to his Memorandum in
 
Opposition to Respondents’ first motion for summary judgment, which relates to
his alleged violation of a temporary restraining order obtained on behalf of
Mrs. Cherry. Petitioner’s interactions with the Cherrys were apparently the
subject of actions by other state agencies. This declaration by Petitioner
does not appear relevant to whether Moriyama acted with probable cause or
malice.
 
24
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that contained a “Law Offices of Rodwin L. Wong” letterhead, but
 
listed the address of what was allegedly Dan Fox’s insurance
 business at 6650 Hawaii Kai Drive, Suite 201. Respondents also
 included a copy of a business card given to the Pachecos that
 identified Petitioner as a “paralegal” but listed the office
 address of Dan Fox. According to Moriyama’s declaration, the
 annuity contracts that were eventually sold to the Pachecos had
 thirty year deferral periods, and Mrs. Pacheco was sixty-five
 years old at the time she purchased the annuity. A redacted copy
 of the specifications of the Pacheco annuity was also provided by
 Respondents, which state the “Maturity Date” as September 13,
 2029.
 
Additionally, Respondents provided the declaration of 
Levins, Moriyama’s supervisor, stating that he discussed the facts that supported the filing of the complaint, and it was his “understanding that there was sufficient information to believe that [Petitioner], along with others, were engaging in deceptive and unfair sales practices in the marketing of high dollar amount deferred annuities to a substantial number of elderly persons in the State of Hawai' i.” 
In his affidavit attached to both his Memoranda in
 
Opposition to Respondents’ first and second motions for summary
 judgment, Petitioner alleges that “[a]ll work I performed for the
 Law Offices of Rodwin Wong was at the direction of and under the
 
25
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
supervision and responsibility of [Rodwin Wong][,] [Rodwin Wong]
 
described my job as being a paralegal[,]” “I did not sell,
 attempt to sell and never even discussed the sale of [insurance
 products or securities] with the Arrudas, [James Gamache, the
 Paakaulas, and the Pachecos][,]” and “I was never privy to the
 relationship between the Law Offices of Rodwin Wong, [Rodwin
 Wong], [or] [Dan Fox].” 
C.
 1.
 
Under the probable cause standard, as noted before, the
 
first question is whether Moriyama subjectively believed that he
 had probable cause to initiate the prosecution when he filed the
 2004 complaint. This is unequivocally established through
 Moriyama’s declaration, which states that “[t]he only reason
 [Petitioner] and the other defendants were named in the [2004
 action] was because the facts obtained through years of
 investigation supported the allegations contained in the
 
complaint that Petitioner engaged in unfair and deceptive acts.” 
The second question, then, is whether Moriyama’s belief
 
that he had probable cause was reasonable. Moriyama must have
 
both reasonably “believ[ed] in the existence of facts upon which
 [his] claim [was] based” and “correctly or reasonably believed
 that under those facts the claim may [have been] valid under the
 
applicable law.” Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 318, 631 P.2d at 602. 
26
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In this case, the declarations and other evidence
 
indicate that Moriyama, as well as other investigators and
 
attorneys at OCP, had engaged in an ongoing investigation for
 several years. Thus there was a reasonable basis for Moriyama to
 believe in the existence of facts upon which the complaint was
 based. 
Next, Respondents brought numerous claims against
 
Petitioner in the complaint, including, for example, that he had
 engaged in unfair and deceptive trade practices, in violation of
 HRS § 481A-3. As noted, HRS § 481A-3, the applicable law, states
 in part that “[a] person engages in deceptive trade practice
 when, in the course of the person’s business, vocation, or
 occupation, the person: . . . . (3) [c]auses likelihood of
 confusion or misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection, or
 association with, or certification by, another . . . . or (12)
 [e]ngages in any other conduct which similarly creates a
 likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding.” It is
 undisputed that the business cards and letterhead Petitioner used
 contained the name “Rodwin Wong,” and the address and telephone
 number of Dan Fox’s insurance company. Based on the information
 known to Moriyama when he filed the complaint, it was reasonable
 for him to believe that, under the facts, the claim against
 Petitioner of deceptive trade practices, inter alia, may have 
27
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been valid under the applicable law. See Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at
 
318, 631 P.2d at 302. 
2.
 
Petitioner argued, in his Memorandum in Opposition, 
that there was no reasonable basis for Respondents’ 2004 
complaint.  He contends that Moriyama’s declaration constitutes 
“inadmissible hearsay,” and that, without that declaration, 
Respondents had not provided enough evidence to show that Moriyama had a reasonable basis for initiating the lawsuit. However, in deciding a motion for summary judgment, a court can consider, among other things, declarations provided by the parties to determine whether a genuine issue of material fact exists. Blaisdell, 119 Hawai' i at 284, 196 P.3d at 282. Since 
the reasonable belief had to exist in the mind of Moriyama, his declaration was relevant to determining whether summary judgment 
was appropriate on this issue. 
Petitioner’s additional objections fail to create an
 
issue of material fact as to Moriyama’s reasonable belief. 
Petitioner points to the fact that Moriyama did not identify
 specific consumers in the complaint. But this was not necessary
 to show that Moriyama had a “reasonable belief in the facts
 underlying the complaint.” Petitioner asserted that Moriyama’s
 motion to modify a protective order entered by the court, and
 subsequent motion to continue trial indicated that he did not
 
28
         
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
have probable cause at the time he filed the complaint. However,
 
Moriyama stated in his declaration that those efforts were tied
 to obtaining more admissible evidence against Petitioner. The
 mere fact that discovery was ongoing in the case does not
 indicate that Moriyama lacked probable cause to file the
 complaint in the first instance, because probable cause does not
 require that a plaintiff have all the facts that he or she may
 later obtain through discovery. Thus, Petitioner provides no
 evidence to support his allegation that Moriyama did not believe
 the facts underlying the complaint, or that Moriyama’s belief was
 unreasonable.
 
Consequently, Moriyama demonstrated that he
 
subjectively believed in the facts upon which the complaint was
 
based. Further, his belief in the existence of these facts was
 
reasonable inasmuch as the facts were the result of a multi-year
 OCP investigation. Finally, for the reasons stated before, the
 facts reasonably supported Moriyama’s belief that it was
 appropriate to bring a claim against Petitioner for, among other
 
things, engaging in deceptive trade practices. In opposition to
 
Respondents’ first motion for summary judgment, Petitioner failed
 
to provide any documentation that created a genuine issue of
 material fact as to whether Moriyama had probable cause to file a
 
complaint. Therefore, the court did not err when it ruled in
 
favor of Respondents on the issue of whether Moriyama had
 
29
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
probable cause to bring the original complaint against Petitioner
 
in the 2004 action.
 
D.
 
At the hearing on Respondents’ first motion for summary
 
judgment, the court also apparently ruled that there was no issue
 of material fact that the prior proceedings were not initiated
 with malice. During the hearing, it stated, “[t]he court does
 not believe that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to
 number 2 and number 3, initiated with probable cause and not
 initiated with malice.” (Emphasis added.) Petitioner had argued
 the element of malice in his Memorandum in Opposition to
 Respondents’ first motion for summary judgment, and included an
 affidavit from Keith A. Matsuoka (Matsuoka), Petitioner’s
 attorney in the 2004 action, as an attachment to his Memorandum
 
in Opposition. 
However, Petitioner alleged in a footnote in his brief
 
to the ICA that “[a]s the court offered no factual basis for its
 
determination that the underlying action was not initiated with
 malice, for the purposes of the instant appeal, it is presumed
 that its determination was based on its finding that the action
 was initiated with probable cause.” Under Petitioner’s approach,
 as alleged in this footnote, the court’s finding of a lack of
 malice followed from its finding of probable cause. See, e.g.,
 
Gallucci v. Milavic, 100 So. 2d 375, 378 (Fla. 1958) (“Although
 
30
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
malice may be inferred from want of probable cause, the converse
 
is not true.”) Accordingly, on appeal, Petitioner did not
 challenge the court’s conclusion on summary judgment that
 Petitioner did not make out the malice element as a matter of
 
law.
 
In any event, “‘unless plaintiff can produce some 
affirmative evidence that malice existed,’” summary judgment in 
favor of Moriyama was appropriate on that issue. Brodie, 2 Haw. 
App. at 320, 631 P.2d at 603 (quoting 10 Wright & Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 2730 (1973)). Malice is defined as “[t]he intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1042 (9th ed. 2009). 
Thus, “[i]n order to establish the element of malice for a malicious prosecution claim, a plaintiff must show inter alia that the defendant initiated the prior proceeding with ‘the intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act’ and the emphasis is on the misuse of criminal or civil actions ‘as a means for causing harm.’” Isobe v. Sakatani, 127 
Hawai'i 368, 388, 279 P.3d 33, 53 (App. 2012) (quoting Young, 119 
Hawai'i at 419, 198 P.3d at 682) (brackets omitted)). 
This court has acknowledged that “‘it is true that 
malice is seldom the subject of a confession by the wrongdoer. It usually must be proved by inferences from other evidence.’” Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i at 483, 142 P.3d at 22 (quoting Myers v. 
31
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Cohen, 67 Haw. 389, 397, 688 P.2d 1145, 1151 (1984)); see also 
Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 322, 631 P.2d at 605 (holding that an inference of malice may be supported by direct or circumstantial evidence). However, “‘[b]are allegations or factually unsupported conclusions are insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact, and therefore, insufficient to reverse a grant of summary judgment.’” Id. (quoting Reed v. City & County of 
Honolulu, 76 Hawai' i 219, 230, 873 P.2d 98, 109 (1994)). Rather, 
a plaintiff must set forth some “independent evidence of conduct other than a voluntary dismissal, from which [] improper motive can be inferred.” Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 320, 631 P.2d at 603. 
Here, Respondents had probable cause to initiate the
 
suit. In support of their first motion for summary judgment,
 Respondents point to a lack of evidence provided by Petitioner to
 show malice on Moriyama’s part, stating that, for example, “[t]he
 [Petitioner] does not dispute, . . . that [] Moriyama extended
 professional courtesies to [Petitioner], pro se, after the OCP
 action was initiated.” In response, Petitioner alleged that when
 the action was initiated, Moriyama had “absolutely no information
 showing that [Petitioner] was involved in or connected with any
 of the annuities or securities which formed the bases for any of
 the charges alleged against him,” and thus, a jury could infer
 that Moriyama acted with malice. But, this allegation relates to
 probable cause, and as established supra, Petitioner failed to
 
32
         
      
       
 
        
        
        
  
      
     
     
        
       
       
      
      
         
        
      
       
       
    
       
        
       
      
      
      
    
       
     
       
       
        
        
          
           
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
provide any evidence to create a factual question as to whether
 
Moriyama acted with probable cause. 
As noted, in opposition to Respondents’ first summary
 
judgment motion, Petitioner had included Matsuoka’s affidavit,17
 
in further support of his contention that Moriyama acted with
 malice. The affidavit stated, inter alia, that
 
(26) Throughout the course of proceedings, []
Moriyama appeared to display a very personal animus
against [Petitioner].
(27) I believe this led [] Moriyama to disregard
or knowingly fail to assess and analyze the applicable
law in order to persecute [Petitioner] in violation of
his legal rights.
(28) This animus presented itself in various
ways, including his constant proclamations that
[Petitioner]’s actions were the most egregious.
 
17 The Matsuoka affidavit further states that, among other things,
 
(29) [] Moriyama also appeared to exercise an
unhealthy degree of influence and be over-involved in
the investigations and proceedings conducted by other
departments and agencies, including State v. Arquette ,
Civil No. 04-1-1985; In re Hazel Cherry , FC-G No. 04­
1-0279; and In re Hazel Cherry , FC-AA No. 04-1-0008.
(30) Based on my interaction with these
departments and agencies, I concluded that [] Moriyama
was a major “source” of misinformation which formed
 the basis for their claims.
 
(31) [] Moriyama also appeared to exert an
unhealthy degree of influence over the actions of the
Office of the Public Guardian and Maximum Legal
Service Corp., fiduciaries in various matters, which
led to procedural difficulties with little beneficial
effect except to block [Petitioner’s] access to
information necessary to defend himself.
(32) [] Moriyama’s conduct, which I would term
“unreasonable,” needlessly increased the cost of
litigation and ultimately required the trust estate of
Hazel Cherry to indemnify [Petitioner] for more than
$180,000 in fees and costs pursuant to an order
entered in In re Hazel Cherry , TR. No. 06-1-0013.
 
However, these allegations set forth with regard to Moriyama’s conduct in
other proceedings are irrelevant inasmuch as they do not allege any specific
facts upon which Matsuoka’s conclusions are based.
 
33
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 However, this affidavit does not establish 
“independent evidence” of malice sufficient to create a genuine 
issue of material fact. In Cayetano, the plaintiff alleged that the State of Hawai' i had maliciously prosecuted her on charges of 
hindering prosecution and conspiracy. 111 Hawai' i at 482, 143 
P.3d at 21. There was no dispute that the underlying proceedings 
were terminated in the plaintiff’s favor, and “neither side point[ed] to any evidence in the record as to whether the State had probable cause to charge [the plaintiff].” Id. Thus, this 
court addressed only whether the defendants’ motion for summary judgment should be granted on the issue of malice. Id. at 482­
83, 143 P.3d at 21-22. Cayetano held that the defendants had met 
their burden inasmuch as they pointed to records of cases arising from the same underlying facts, in which the circuit court had found that “there was no evidence to show that the indictment was improperly motivated.” Id. 
This court took judicial notice of that finding, and
 
noted that, “the burden shifted to [the plaintiff] to demonstrate
 evidence of ‘specific facts’ to dispute or contradict [the
 d]efendants’ evidence that there was no improper motive behind
 the prosecution.” Id. The Cayetano court held that because the
 
plaintiff failed to adduce evidence of “specific facts” from
 which malice could be inferred, but instead “relied on the
 conclusory allegations of the complaint[,]” she failed to raise a
 
34
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether the prosecution was
 
initiated with malice. Id. Similarly, here, Petitioner has
 
relied primarily on conclusory allegations in contending that
 Moriyama acted with malice. 
Paragraph 26 of Matsuoka’s affidavit states that 
“[t]hroughout the course of proceedings, [] Moriyama appeared to display a very personal animus against [Petitioner].” Such a claim must be supported by “specific facts,” because unsupported conclusions are insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact. With respect to Paragraph 26, Matsuoka provided his opinion that Moriyama “appeared to display a very personal animus” as a conclusion, without any discussion of supporting facts. For example, Matsuoka did not allege when this personal animus was displayed, under what circumstances, how the animus was relayed, or any other facts regarding how he knew that Moriyama had a personal animus toward Petitioner. Matsuoka’s statement of opinion, at Paragraph 26, which does not include any “specific facts,” therefore cannot serve as circumstantial evidence from which to infer malice. See Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 
at 482, 143 P.3d at 21. 
Matsuoka’s affidavit then states at Paragraph 27 that
 
“I believe this [animus] led [] Moriyama to disregard or
 knowingly fail to assess and analyze the applicable law in order
 to persecute [Petitioner] in violation of his legal rights.” 
35
         
 
          
          
            
              
           
         
            
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Paragraph 27 cannot provide a basis for a finding of malice 
inasmuch as it has been established that Petitioner did reasonably “assess and analyze the applicable law,” because he had probable cause to bring a claim against Petitioner under the applicable law.
18 Further, Matsuoka’s opinion again failed to 
allege any “specific facts” that could form the basis of an inference of malice. He did not state how Moriyama failed to assess the applicable law, or refer to the law that Moriyama misapplied. Therefore, Petitioner did not raise a genuine issue of material fact that Moriyama was acting with “the intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act,” Black’s Law Dictionary 1042, through “the misuse of a criminal or civil action ‘as a means for causing harm.’” Isobe, 127 Hawai' i 
at 388, 279 P.3d at 53. In the instant case, Matsuoka’s “unsupported conclusion” does not create a genuine issue of material fact. See Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i at 482, 143 P.3d at 21. 
Paragraph 29 of Matsuoka’s affidavit states that
 
“[t]his animus presented itself in various ways, including his
 constant proclamations that [Petitioner]’s actions were the most 
18
 As noted, under the standard for probable cause, one of the
 
elements is whether the plaintiff “correctly or reasonably believes that under
[the] facts, [his or her] claim may be valid under the applicable law[.]”
Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 318, 631 P.2d at 602 (citation omitted). Since this
 
element of probable cause has been established in this case, as discussed
supra, Matsuoka’s allegation at Paragraph 27 that Moriyama disregarded or
knowingly failed to assess and analyze the applicable law cannot serve as a
basis for an inference of malice.
 
36
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
egregious.” This statement does not provide specific facts in 
support of Petitioner’s allegation of malice. The word “egregious” is defined as “extremely or remarkably bad; flagrant.” Black’s Law Dictionary 593. However, Matsuoka does 
not refer to the circumstances under which these “proclamations” were made, including the number of times they were made, or when during the proceedings they were made, other than to say that they were made “constantly,” and that Moriyama stated that Petitioner’s actions “were the most egregious.” (Emphasis added.) This indicates that Moriyama declared that the behavior of all the defendants was to some extent “egregious.” That declaration, by itself, even if made “constantly,” as alleged by Matsuoka, does not demonstrate an intent on Moriyama’s part to “caus[e] harm” to Petitioner “without justification or excuse,” Black’s Law Dictionary 1042, through the initiation of the lawsuit. Isobe, 127 Hawai' i at 388, 279 P.3d at 53. Without 
specific facts regarding how these proclamations evinced a particular desire to “cause harm” on Moriyama’s part, Paragraph 29 does not create a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the issue of malice. 
Thus, no specific facts were alleged to create a
 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether malice can be
 inferred from Moriyama’s actions. Because Petitioner failed to
 demonstrate “independent evidence” of malice in this case, the
 
37
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
court properly granted summary judgment to Respondents on this
 
element of Petitioner’s malicious prosecution claim. 
E.
 
Petitioner must establish all three elements of a
 
malicious prosecution claim in order to sustain his action. See
 
Myers, 67 Haw. at 391, 688 P.2d at 1148. There was no genuine
 issue of material fact with respect to probable cause or malice. 
Inasmuch as there was a reasonable basis for the OCP’s complaint
 under the facts and no independent evidence of bias, see Brodie, 
2 Haw. App. at 322, 631 P.2d at 605, the court correctly granted
 summary judgment to Respondents as to probable cause and malice,
 two of the three elements of a malicious prosecution suit. The
 third prong of the test relating to termination of the 2004
 action in favor of Petitioner thus need not be reached. The
 court having been correct in granting summary judgment to
 Respondents on the initiation of the suit, the ICA’s decision on
 this question must be affirmed.
 
VI.
 
As set forth, supra, a cause of action for maintaining
 
a malicious prosecution should be recognized.  However,
 
Petitioner in this case cannot make out a claim that Respondents
 
maintained a malicious prosecution against him when they
 prosecuted the 2004 action. As noted before, the three elements
 in a claim for maintaining a malicious prosecution are: (1) that
 
38
         
         
          
            
           
        
            
         
           
          
            
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the prior proceedings were terminated in the plaintiff’s favor,
 
(2) that the prior proceedings were maintained without probable
 cause, and (3) that the prior proceedings were maintained with
 malice. See, e.g., Zamos, 12 Cal. Rptr.3d at 54.
 
At the time Respondents filed their first motion for
 
summary judgment, the court held that the tort of malicious
 prosecution extended only to the initiation of a claim. However,
 with respect to Respondents’ second motion for summary judgment,
 both parties provided arguments as to why Moriyama did or did not
 maintain the prosecution with probable cause and without
 malice.
19
 
A. 
In applying the elements discussed above, Respondents
 
had to establish that there was no genuine issue of material fact
 as to whether Moriyama had probable cause to maintain the
 prosecution after filing suit. In other words, when Moriyama
 filed his last motion in the case, his Motion to Continue Trial
 on April 11, 2006, he still had to have had probable cause
 for the claims against Petitioner. 
19
 Respondents included a section in their second motion for summary
 
judgment titled “Probable Cause Existed For the Continuation of the Prior
 
Proceeding. At No Time During the Pendency Of The Prior Proceeding Did
[Respondent] Moriyama Act With Malice.” In his Memorandum in Opposition to
 Respondents’ second motion for summary judgment, Petitioner argued that
“[t]here is substantial evidence showing that there is a genuine issue as to
whether there was probable cause for continuing the prosecution of
[Petitioner].” In their Reply Memorandum in connection with the second motion
for summary judgment, Respondents further asserted that “[t]he fact that some
elderly persons did not want to participate in the OCP proceeding does not
create a lack of probable cause that a violation of the law had occurred.”
 
39
         
       
       
        
       
      
        
        
         
         
              
           
            
              
          
             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In support of their second motion for summary judgment,
 
Respondents stated that,
 
[T]hroughout the pendency of the OCP litigation, []
facts concerning who was in control of the
‘paralegals’ did not change. Moriyama and the OCP
investigators who continued to work on [the] OCP
investigation of [the] scheme only confirmed [Rodwin]
Wong’s pre-lawsuit admissions as to who was in control
of [the] scheme during the pendency of that OCP
lawsuit.
 
Respondents further pointed to Moriyama’s declaration in which he
 
recounted his interview with Rodwin Wong, who admitted that
 “paralegals” who worked for him actually operated under the
 direction of Dan Fox.
 
Petitioner contends in his Memorandum in Opposition to
 
Respondents’ second motion for summary judgment that OCP records
 both failed to reveal any complaints about him by some of the
 individual consumers Respondent identified, and confirmed that
 Petitioner never discussed insurance products or the sale of
 securities with them. Thus, Petitioner asserts, although
 Respondents knew in February 2002 that Petitioner had “never
 discussed or sold insurance products or securities to [James
 Gamache or the Paakaulas], and without any complaints from or
 about Petitioner by [the Arrudas or Pachecos],”
20
  Moriyama
20
 In support of his Memorandum in Opposition to Respondents’ second
 
motion for summary judgment, Petitioner provided the same affidavit, dated
September 13, 2005, in which he states that he “did not sell, attempt to sell
and never even discussed the sale of securities [or insurance products] with
the Arrudas, [James Gamache, the Paakulas, or the Pachecos].” It also states
 that, “[a]ll work I performed for the Law Offices of Rodwin Wong was at the
direction of and under the supervision and responsibility of [Rodwin Wong][,]
[Rodwin Wong] described my job as being a paralegal[,]” and “I was never privy
(continued...)
 
40
         
      
      
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
continued to prosecute Petitioner. 
Respondents’ probable cause, however, was not based
 
exclusively on complaints from specific consumers but, rather,
 
rested on the underlying investigation conducted by OCP, which
 had found that Petitioner was part of an overall “scheme” to sell
 long term annuities, and that as part of this scheme, Petitioner
 had misrepresented himself to consumers through use of misleading
 business cards and letterhead. As set forth supra, Respondents
 had charged Petitioner with, inter alia, unfair and deceptive
 trade practices pursuant to HRS § 481A-3, which includes “(3)
 [c]aus[ing] likelihood of confusion or of misunderstanding as to
 affilitation, connection, or association with, or certification
 by another[,]” and “(12) [e]ngag[ing] in any conduct which
 similarly creates a likelihood of confusion or of
 misunderstanding.” 
Under the standard for determining whether probable
 
cause existed, the first question is whether the plaintiff
 subjectively believed in the facts underlying the claim. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 675. Respondents attached
 another declaration from Moriyama to their Memorandum in Support
 of their second motion for summary judgment. He stated, in part, 
[a]fter filing the lawsuit, information acquired by
OCP continued to confirm what the various
 
20(...continued)
t
o the relationship between the Law Offices of Rodwin Wong, [Rodwin Wong],
[or] [Dan Fox].”
 
41
         
    
     
       
    
      
       
    
 
        
          
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
investigations had earlier revealed concerning
[Petitioner’s] and other defendants’ conduct and
 association with one another. As the litigation
progressed through discovery and continued
investigations, the information that I and other
persons at OCP obtained continued to substantiate the
allegations of OCP’s complaint.
 
(Emphases added.) This declaration indicates that throughout the
 
pendency of the proceedings, Moriyama continued to believe in the
 facts underlying the suit.
 
Then, it must be determined whether Moriyama’s belief
 
in the facts underlying his continuation of the suit was
 reasonable. On this point, Petitioner alleges in his September
 19, 2005 affidavit that “[Respondents] knew that there was no
 probable cause to prosecute Petitioner based on annuities sold to
 and/or securities sold for the [Arrudas, James Gamache, the
 Paakaulas, or the Pachecos], on October 10, 2005, and yet . . .
 [] Moriyama continued his prosecution of [Petitioner]. . . .” 
Id. However, Moriyama’s belief in the facts underlying the
 
initial complaint still was reasonable based on the information
 he had regarding Petitioner’s involvement in the overall scheme,
 including Petitioner’s employment by Rodwin Wong. Moriyama’s
 second declaration also stated that after the lawsuit was filed,
 additional consumers who dealt with Petitioner “complained to, or
 were referred to, OCP[,]” including the Cherrys,
21 James Ah Nee,
 
and Blanche Schwarz. Thus, Moriyama’s belief in the existence of
 
21
 Although, as noted, summary judgment was later granted to
 
Petitioner with respect to claims arising from his interactions with the
Cherrys, it was granted on the basis of res judicata.
 
42
         
           
         
            
          
        
     
         
        
      
     
       
    
      
       
      
     
 
              
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
facts indicating that Petitioner was part of the scheme to sell
 
long term annuities to elderly consumers, was objectively
 reasonable.
22
 
Finally, in order to have probable cause, Moriyama must
 
have continued during the pendency of the suit to “correctly or
 reasonably” believe that under the facts at the time, the claim
 against Petitioner might be “valid under the applicable law.” 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 675. As discussed, Respondents
 had alleged that Petitioner violated, inter alia, HRS § 481A-3,
 by engaging in deceptive trade practices. HRS § 481A-3 states
 that “[a] person engages in deceptive trade practices when, in
 the course of the person’s business, vocation, or occupation, the
 person: . . . . (3) [c]auses likelihood of confusion or
 
22 Based on the similarity of their elements, as discussed supra, the
 
standard for determining whether a plaintiff had probable cause for
maintaining a lawsuit should be coterminous with that of initiating a lawsuit.
As set forth by the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 675:
 
One who takes an active part in the initiation,
continuation or procurement of civil proceedings
against another has probable cause for doing so if he
reasonably believes in the existence of the facts upon
which the claim is based, and either
 
(a) correctly or reasonably believes that
under those facts the claim may be valid
under the applicable law, or
 
(b) believes to this effect in reliance
upon the advice of counsel, sought in good
faith and given after full disclosure of
all relevant facts within his knowledge
and information.
 
(Emphases added.) See also Brodie , 2 Haw. App. at 319, 631 P.2d at 602
(discussing the standard above as applied to the initiation of a lawsuit).
 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection, or association
 
with, or certification by, another . . . . or (12) [e]ngages in
 any other conduct which similarly creates a likelihood of
 confusion or of misunderstanding.” Moriyama’s belief that
 Petitioner had misrepresented himself to consumers, through his
 alleged use of false contact information on his business cards
 and letterhead, could reasonably have led Moriyama to believe
 that a claim against Petitioner for violations of subsections (3)
 and (12) of HRS § 481A-3, among other things, might be valid
 under the applicable law. See Restatement (Second) of Torts §
 
675. Thus, Moriyama’s continuing prosecution of Petitioner
 
satisfies the element of probable cause as discussed in Brodie
 and the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 675. Summary judgment in
 favor of Respondents on this issue then was appropriate.
 
B.
 
As discussed supra with regard to Petitioner’s claim 
that Moriyama maliciously initiated the prosecution against Petitioner, Petitioner must produce “independent evidence” of malice. Young, 119 Hawai' i at 419, 198 P.3d at 682. Petitioner 
states that it is “well established” that “‘[m]alice . . . may be inferred . . . from want of probable cause.’” (Quoting Stewart v. Sonneborn, 98 U.S. 187, 194 (1878).) However, under Hawai' i 
case law, the evidence suggesting lack of probable cause must itself support an inference of malice, and if it does not support 
44
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that inference, then Petitioner must have “independent evidence”
 
of that malice. Brodie, 2 Haw. App. at 322, 631 P.2d at 605. In
 
Brodie, for example, the ICA held that “where the only evidence
 of a want of probable cause is the inference that may be drawn
 from the voluntary dismissal of the original action,” a finding
 that there is no probable cause “will not support the second
 inference, that the defendant acted with improper motives. There
 must be some other direct or circumstantial evidence to support
 the inference of malice.” Id. Here, where Moriyama had probable
 
cause to initiate the prosecution, malice cannot be inferred. 
In any event, Petitioner does not allege any
 
“independent evidence” to support an inference that Moriyama
 acted with malice in maintaining the prosecution. Petitioner’s
 only argument is that Moriyama continued the prosecution despite
 knowing that there was no probable cause for any of the charges
 
as alleged. On the other hand, Respondents point to Moriyama’s
 
declaration as evincing his lack of malice during the pendency of
 
the 2004 proceeding. Specifically, as noted before, they allege
 that Moriyama granted several extensions to Petitioner personally
 to allow him more time to respond to the original OCP complaint. 
Petitioner provided the same evidence and affidavits with regard
 to malice as was attached to his Memorandum in Opposition to
 Respondents’ first motion for summary judgment, including the
 Matsuoka affidavit. As discussed, the allegations set forth in 
45
         
          
        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Matsuoka’s affidavit do not create a genuine issue of material
 
fact as to whether malice can be inferred on the part of Moriyama
 in filing the complaint. Similarly, the allegations do not
 create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Moriyama
 acted with malice in continuing the prosecution. 
Therefore, Petitioner cannot support his allegation 
that Moriyama acted with malice with any independent evidence in the form of specific facts from which malice can be inferred. See Cayetano, 11 Hawai' i at 483, 143 P.3d at 22. Thus summary 
judgment must be granted in favor of Respondents on the issue of malice. Inasmuch as all three elements must be satisfied to sustain an action for maintaining a malicious prosecution, the third element of successful termination of the prior proceeding in Petitioner’s favor need not be reached. 
VII.
 
Petitioner’s third question, whether HRS § 487-1 is
 
relevant in determining the standard of care for his negligence
 action,
23 is preserved on appeal. The ICA interpreted his
 
argument as asserting that HRS § 487-1 created a private right of
 action and resolved that issue in the negative. Although
 Respondents contend that Petitioner changed his argument on
 appeal, and argued for the first time that HRS § 487-1 is
 
23
 As noted, in his complaint in the instant case, Petitioner alleged
 
that Moriyama’s “failure to sufficiently investigate” the claims against
 
Petitioner was negligent.
 
46
         
            
             
             
              
            
              
 
          
              
        
         
            
          
         
               
          
          
            
           
          
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
relevant to the standard of care in a negligence action,24 the
 
record supports Petitioner’s contention that he argued both
 
issues before the court below. Petitioner contended both that
 HRS § 487-1 set forth a private right of action
25 and, in the
 
alternative, that HRS § 487-1 was informative as to Respondents’
 duty of care for Petitioner’s negligence claim.
26 Petitioner
 
argues (1) that under Lee v. Corregedore, 83 Hawai' i 154, 173, 
925 P.2d 324, 343 (1996), a court may “adopt the requirements of
 a statute as the standard of conduct necessary to avoid liability
 for negligence,” and (2) that pursuant to Tseu ex rel. Hobbs v.
 Jeyte, 88 Hawai' i 85, 962 P.2d 349 (1998), “HRS § 487-1 is 
indicative of a duty of care.” However, neither case
 demonstrates that HRS § 487-1 creates or is “indicative of” a
 duty of care. 
24 “As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at 
trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule
applies in both criminal and civil cases.” State v. Moses , 102 Hawai 'i 449,
456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003); see e.g. , State v. Ildefonso , 72 Haw. 573, 584,
827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) (“Our review of the record reveals that [thedefendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it is deemed to havebeen waived.”). 
25 Since Petitioner did not present this issue in his Application, we
 
do not address whether or not HRS § 487-1 sets forth a private cause of
action. See Arquette , 2012 WL 2864352 at *3.
 
26
 In his Memorandum in Opposition to Respondents’ first motion for 
summary judgment, Petitioner stated that “[HRS § 487-1] imposes a duty of careon [Respondents] to exercise their statutory duties with due regard to[Petitioner’s] legitimate business activities. See Corregedore , 83 Hawai 'i at 
172, 925 P.2d at 342 (Duty in a negligence action may be defined by common lawor by statute[.]).” Petitioner further asserted that, “‘[i]f a statute[]contains no express provision that its violation shall result in tortliability, and no implication to that effect, the court may, and in certaintypes of cases customarily will, adopt the requirements of the enactment asthe standard of conduct necessary to avoid liability for negligence.’”(Quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 285 comment c (1965).) 
47
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
Pursuant to Corregedore, a duty of care may be 
established by statute if a “legislative enactment [] lays down 
requirements of conduct, and provides expressly or by implication that a violation shall entail civil liability in tort.” 83 Hawai'i at 172, 925 P.2d at 342. However, HRS § 487-1 cannot be 
construed to “lay[] down requirements of conduct[.]” Id. The 
statute creates “a permanent office of consumer protection” for the purpose of coordinating “the services offered to the consumer,” and “aiding the development” of various programs. HRS § 487-1. The statute does not obligate government officials to act in a certain manner or in accordance with any particular standard or proscribe any conduct. In sum, the statute does not “lay[] down requirements of conduct.” Corregedore, 83 Hawai' i at 
172, 925 P.2d at 342. 
Further, Petitioner conceded in its Answering Brief
 
before the ICA that the statute “contains no express provision
 that its violation shall result in tort liability, and no
 implication to that effect.” Because Corregedore requires that
 the statute “provide[] expressly or by implication that a
 violation shall entail civil liability in tort,” id., Corregedore
 does not apply to HRS § 487-1.
 
B.
 
Also, Jeyte does not indicate that HRS § 487-1 is
 
48
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“indicative of a standard of care.” In Jeyte, this court held 
that the plaintiff could pursue “a common law tort action for negligence” when the Hawai' i Civil Rights Commission (HCRC) 
negligently investigated a complaint against the plaintiff. 88 Hawai'i at 91, 962 P.2d at 350. Jetye reasoned that “the HCRC is 
subject to a duty to follow its own administrative rules,” and noted that the HCRC had failed to follow a rule which required it to recognize an affirmative defense to what would otherwise be a discriminatory practice. Id. Jeyte then held that “there exists 
a duty of reasonable care in the exercise of a statutorily granted authority.” Id. at 92, 962 P.2d at 351. 
On reconsideration, however, this court clarified
 
Jeyte’s scope. According to this court, the HCRC misapprehended
 the opinion, because “as stated on multiple occasions in the
 opinion,” the “cause of action which may exist against the HCRC
 is based on a duty to follow its own administrative regulations.” 
Id. at 93, 962 P.2d at 352 (emphasis added). Here, Petitioner
 makes no argument that Respondents ignored or violated applicable
 regulations. Moreover, HRS § 487-1 states the purpose behind the
 creation of an office of consumer protection, but does not
 provide any standard governing conduct or any provision which
 prescribes a duty. Consequently, under these facts, Jeyte is not
 “indicative of a standard of care.”
 
49
         
  
 
        
            
 
   
         
        
        
   
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VIII.
 
With respect to Petitioner’s fourth question,
 
Respondents asked that Petitioner pay for the costs of mediation
 
by Dispute Prevention Resolution,27  for the deposition
 
transcripts and records of Dr. Claudine Kimura, Petitioner,
 Moriyama, and Dr. L. Martin Johnson, and for the transcript of
 
the first summary judgment hearing. On July 13, 2010, Petitioner
 
objected to the taxation of these costs, arguing that mediation
 was not a cost explicitly set forth by statute and that the
 depositions were not necessary for Respondents’ case. 
Respondents replied that the costs were “reasonable on their face
 and were necessarily incurred . . . .” The court allowed
 Respondents the costs of obtaining the deposition transcript of
 Moriyama and the transcript of the first summary judgment
 proceedings, but held that Petitioner was not required to pay for
 the costs of mediation, or of the other deposition transcripts.
 
A.
 
28
 Pursuant to HRS § 607-9,  “[n]o other costs of court
27 According to the declaration of Lawrence I. Kawasaki, mediation
 
was conducted on February 2, 2009, with Keith Hunter of Dispute Prevention and
Resolution, Inc.
 
28
 HRS § 607-9 provides:
 
No other costs of court shall be charged in any
court in addition to those prescribed in this chapter
in any suit, action, or other proceeding, except as
otherwise provided by law.
 
A
ll actual disbursements, including but not
 
(continued...)
 
50
         
      
      
     
      
     
         
        
        
         
    
  
      
     
      
     
       
        
         
       
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
shall be charged in any court in addition to those prescribed in
 
this chapter.” However, 
[a]ll actual disbursements, including but not limited
to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and
counsel, expenses for deposition transcript originals
and copies, and other incidental expenses, including
copying costs, intrastate long distance telephone
charges, and postage, sworn to by an attorney or a
party, and deemed reasonable by the court, may be
allowed in taxation of costs. In determining whether
and what costs should be taxed, the court may consider
the equities of the situation.
 
HRS § 607-9. Both parties agree that under HRS § 607-9, “the
 
court may not deny costs to the prevailing party without
 
justification, unless the circumstances justifying the denial of
 costs are plain from the record.” Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i at 52, 
961 P.2d at 617; see also HRCP Rule 54(d) (“[C]osts shall be
 allowed as a matter of course to the prevailing party unless the
 court otherwise directs.”). Further, both parties agree that the 
court did not expressly justify its denial of costs in the
 present case.
 
B.
 
Petitioner contends that the reasons supporting the
 
court’s denial of costs “are evident from the record as
 
28(...continued)
limited to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses
and counsel, expenses for deposition transcript
originals and copies, and other incidental expenses,
including copying costs, intrastate long distance
telephone charges, and postage, sworn to by an
attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by the
court, may be allowed in taxation of costs. In
 determining whether and what costs should be taxed,
the court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
51
         
 
 
 
         
            
           
           
             
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Respondents’] malicious prosecution of [Petitioner] compelled
 
him to defend himself in a substantive amount of litigation which
 spanned two years.” Sheets v. Yamaha Motors Corp., U.S.A., 891
 
F.2d 533 (5th Cir. 1990), is instructive in this regard.
29
 
Sheets held that the trial court’s reason for the denial of costs
 was “apparent from the record,” because the court was “forced to
 endure defendants’ repeated and abusive hardball tactics” such as
 violating discovery orders, misleading the plaintiff, and
 utilizing “obfuscatory defense strategies.” Id.
 at 539. 
Under
 
these “egregious circumstances,” 
Sheets held that the failure to
 
set forth reasons was not an abuse of discretion. Id. at 540. 
Here, the record does not evince circumstances that would make
 
the reasons for the court’s denial of costs “plain from the
 
record,” such as in the manner exemplified in Sheets. 
C.
 
Respondents argue that the costs of mediation and the
 
depositions should have been awarded to Respondents as a matter
 
of law. They cite 
Pulawa, 112 Hawai' i at 19-22, 143 P.3d at 
1221-24, for the proposition that “in the absence of evidence of 
misconduct or some fault on the part of the prevailing party 
29
 “This court has previously noted that Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 54(d) is functionally identical to HRCP Rule 54(d). Where a 
Hawai'i rule of civil procedure is identical to the federal rule, the
interpretation of this rule by federal courts is highly persuasive.” Pulawa,
112 Hawai 'i at 19 n.15, 143 P.3d at 1221 n.15 (citing federal authority to
determine whether various costs should be assessed to the losing parties). 
52
         
 
          
             
            
            
         
           
             
          
            
             
           
             
         
            
           
           
              
            
              
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
. . . the trial court does not have any discretion to reduce or
 
deny an award of costs.”
 
In Pulawa, the losing parties argued that, because they
 
demonstrated that they were indigent, the circuit court abused
 its discretion in requiring them to pay costs. Id. at 19, 143
 
P.3d at 1221. A majority of this court said there is “a strong
 presumption that the prevailing party will recover costs,” which
 can only be overcome by “some showing [by the losing party] that
 an award would be inequitable under the circumstances.” Id. 
Pulawa held that the losing parties had not provided enough
 evidence to demonstrate that the denial of costs was an abuse of
 discretion.
30 Id. at 20-22, 143 P.3d at 1222-24. Pulawa thus
 
does not stand for the broad proposition that evidence is always
 necessary to justify a denial of costs.
31
 
30 The dissent in Pulawa argued that the losing parties’ failure to 
list their assets was not dispositive, and that in any event the case should
be remanded to allow the losing parties to present the necessary evidence. 112Hawai'i at 28, 143 P.3d at 1230 (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting). 
31 Numerous Hawai 'i cases acknowledge that a losing party may justify 
a denial of costs without submitting evidence. See, e.g., Takeuchi , 88 
Hawai'i at 54, 961 P.2d at 619 (noting that office supplies are not generally
taxable costs, and therefore the prevailing party was required to demonstrate a “compelling rationale” in order for the court to grant this expense) (citingTradewinds Hotel Inc. v. Cochran , 8 Haw. App. 256, 271, 799 P.2d 60, 68,
reconsideration denied , 8 Haw. App. 662, 868 P.2d 466 (1990); Harkins v.
Ikeda, 57 Haw. 378, 386, 557 P.2d 788, 794 (1976) (denying costs without an
evidentiary showing because out of state traveling expenses were notexplicitly mentioned by statute); Geldert v. State , 3 Haw. App. 259, 268, 649
P.2d 1165, 1172 (1982) (holding that deposition costs are not awarded unlessthe deposition was reasonably necessary for trial); but see Abreu v. Raymond ,
56 Haw. 613, 614, 546 P.2d 1013, 1014 (1976) (“[T]he denial of costs to theprevailing party or the assessment of partial costs against him is in thenature of a penalty for some defection on his part in the course of thelitigation.”). 
53
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Instead, this court has held that “the losing party 
bears the burden of showing that the denial of costs is 
justified.” Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i at 53, 961 P.2d at 618. 
Justification, however, does not necessarily require an evidentiary showing. A party may set forth reasons that a certain expense item should be denied without making an evidentiary showing on that issue. See 10 Moore’s Federal 
Practice §54.101(b) (3d ed. 1998) (listing reasons for declining to tax costs that do not require an evidentiary showing, such as costs incurred unreasonably). 
D.
 
The costs associated with mediation are not explicitly
 
listed in HRS § 607-9 as taxable. It has been held that a court
 
has discretion to assess the costs of mediation to the losing
 
party if the mediation was court-ordered. See, e.g., Gibson v.
 
Bobroff, 57 Cal. Rptr. 2d 235, 240 (Cal. Ct. App. 1996)
 (“Accordingly, we reject defendants’ view that only those costs
 directly related to the preparation or the trial of a case are
 recoverable as being reasonably necessary to the conduct of the
 litigation. This is especially true here since the mediation was
 court-ordered.”); Spears v. Huber, No. 07-11-0193-CV, 2012 WL
 933780, at *4 (Tex. App. March 20, 2012) (“As for the mediator's
 fee, when a mediator is appointed by the court, it may set a 
54
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonable fee for the services of the mediator and tax the fee
 
as costs of suit.”); Albuquerque Commons P’ship v. City Council
 of Albuquerque, 212 P.3d 1122, 1141 (N.M. App. 2009), reversed on
 other grounds, 248 P.3d 856 (N.M. 2011) (holding that it was
 within the trial court’s discretion to tax the costs of mediation
 because the mediation was court ordered and the losing party did
 not participate in good faith); Elder v. Islam, 869 So. 2d. 600,
 603 (Fla. App. 2004) (“[T]he costs of mediation can be awarded if
 the parties are required to mediate under a statute or court
 rule.”).
 
Costs generated in the pursuit of litigation are 
distinguished from those “severable from and unrelated to the litigation.” See Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i at 54-55, 961 P.2d at 619­
20 (holding that “[m]eals are not taxable costs” because “the necessity of eating lunch is severable from and unrelated to the litigation”). When a court orders the parties to enter mediation, they have no choice but to obey. In such circumstances, the costs of entering court-ordered mediation are related to and cannot be “sever[ed] from” the underlying litigation. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i at 55, 961 P.2d at 620; see 
Gibson, 49 Cal. App. 4th at 1209 (noting that court-ordered mediation “is a necessary part of litigation”); see also Elder, 869 So. 2d. at 603 (awarding the costs of court-ordered mediation 
55
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
because the parties “had to expend that”). Hence, it would be
 
within the court’s discretion to decide that the cost of court-
ordered mediation is a “reasonable” cost that may be taxed. HRS
 § 607-9.
 
On the other hand, when the parties voluntarily enter
 
into mediation, it has been concluded that the losing party
 cannot be assessed the costs of mediation absent a compelling
 demonstration by the prevailing party. Smith v. Village of
 
Ruidoso, 994 P.2d 50, 60 (N.M. App. 1999) (“We do not think that,
 with respect to mediations conducted pursuant to an agreement of
 the parties, the expense of the mediator’s fee should be a
 recoverable cost.”); see also Orlando Reg’l Med. Ctr., Inc., v.
 Chmielewski, 573 So. 2d. 876, 883 (Fla. App. 1990), abrogated on
 other grounds by Boulis v. Florida Dep’t of Transp., 733 So. 2d
 959 (Fla. 1999) (“Although reasonable costs and expenses for a
 statutorily required mediation procedure are available,
 appellants failed to establish that they were required to submit
 to mediation in this case under any statute or court rule.”); cf.
 Gibson, 49 Cal. App. 4th at 1209 n.7 (“We expressly do not decide
 whether a party prevailing after a trial which is preceded by
 unsuccessful voluntary mediation would be entitled to such
 costs.”) (emphasis in original); but see Liker v. Found. for
 Preservation of Mt. Helix Nature Theater, No. Do41091, 2004 WL 
56
         
 
 
         
           
               
           
           
          
           
            
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1405937, at *6, *8 (Cal. App. June 24, 2004) (“The trial court
 
had discretion to award the Likers their costs of voluntary
 mediation.”).
32
 
Mediation “facilitate[s] the effective, timely and 
voluntary resolution of disputes.” Cf. HRS § 613-2 (Supp. 2000) 
(establishing a center for alternative dispute resolution). In other words, the goal of mediation is to avoid trial, and its attendant costs, altogether. A cost incurred by the parties’ joint decision to attempt to avoid trial would appear to be a cost separate from the underlying litigation, as it represents a shared attempt to avoid the costs of trial. Moreover, because 
litigants may voluntarily enter into mediation for their mutual 
benefit, assessing the losing party the entire cost of mediation 
would appear inequitable.  Consequently, unlike court-ordered 
mediation, a voluntary decision to enter mediation is “severable 
from and unrelated to the litigation,” see Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i 
at 54-55, 961 P.2d at 619-20, inasmuch as under such circumstances voluntary mediation is not a necessity of litigation. 
32
 Liker reasoned that awarding the costs of voluntary mediation may 
encourage parties to enter mediation, because they may believe that the other
side will be compelled to bear their costs. 2004 WL 1405937, at *8 . Liker’s 
assumption is unrealistic –- it is more likely that parties will voluntarily
enter mediation when, based on the circumstances of a specific case, theybelieve that there is a reasonable chance of successfully avoiding theexpenses associated with trial. In any event, the relevant inquiry under Hawai'i law is whether an expense is “severable from and unrelated to the 
underlying litigation.” Takeuchi , 88 Hawai 'i at 54-55, 961 P.2d at 619-20. 
57
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Based on the foregoing, generally, the costs of
 
voluntary mediation should not be taxable. In that light, the
 
prevailing party must provide a compelling reason for the court
 to assess the cost of voluntary mediation to the losing party. 
Cf. id. at 54, 961 P.2d at 619 (“As a general rule, routine
 expenses related to operating a law firm are not taxable. 
Therefore, [the prevailing party] would have to demonstrate a
 compelling rationale for the court to grant this expense.”).
 
As discussed supra, it was error for the court to
 
decline to assess the costs of mediation without providing
 reasons. Id. at 52, 961 P.2d at 617 (“[T]he court may not deny
 
costs to the prevailing party without justification, unless the
 circumstances justifying the denial of costs are plain from the
 record.”). Hence, the court’s decision not to assess Petitioner
 the costs of mediation must be remanded so that the court may set
 forth the reasons for its decision.
 
E.
 
It is well-settled that “deposition costs are only
 
recoverable if the depositions were necessarily obtained for use
 in the trial.” Tradewinds Hotel, 8 Haw. App. at 271, 799 P.2d at
 
69; see also Nani Koolau Co. v. K & M Constr., Inc., 5 Haw. App.
 137, 143, 681 P.2d 580, 586 (1984) (same); Geldert, 3 Haw. App.
 at 268, 649 P.2d at 1172 (same); 10 Moore’s Federal Practice §
 54.101(b) (court may decline to tax costs if costs incurred
 
58
         
  
        
 
     
     
        
       
        
          
         
         
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
unreasonably). The court in this case may decline to assess the
 
costs of the depositions against Petitioner if it found that the
 depositions were not necessarily obtained for use at trial, or
 that to do so would be inequitable. 
Although refusing to tax such costs was within the 
court’s discretion, again, as discussed supra, it was error for the court to do so without providing reasons. Takeuchi, 88 
Hawai'i at 52, 961 P.2d at 617. Consequently, this issue also 
must be remanded to allow the court to set forth the reasons for 
not assessing Petitioner the deposition costs of Dr. Claudine 
Kimura, Petitioner, and Dr. L. Martin Johnson. 
IX.
 
Finally, with respect to Petitioner’s fifth question, 
the ICA properly denied Petitioner’s Motion for Recusal. Disqualification or recusal cases involve a two-part analysis. State v. Ross, 89 Hawai' i 371, 377, 974 P.2d 11, 17 (1998) 
(citing State v. Brown, 70 Haw. 459, 467, 776 P.2d 1182, 1187 (1989)). First, “HRS § 601-7[ 
33
 ] [(Supp. 2004)] is applied to
33 To reiterate, HRS § 601-7 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 601-7. Disqualification of judge; relationship,
pecuniary interest, previous judgment, bias or
prejudice.
(b) Whenever a party to any suit, action, or
proceeding, civil or criminal, makes and files an
affidavit that the judge before whom the action or
proceeding is to be tried or heard has a personal bias
or prejudice either against the party or in favor of
any opposite party to the suit , the judge shall be
disqualified from proceeding therein. Every such
 
(continued...)
 
59
         
        
         
         
        
          
         
       
        
         
        
          
        
       
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
determine whether the alleged bias is covered by any of the
 
specific instances prohibited therein.” Id. Then, “[i]f the
 
alleged bias falls outside of the provisions of HRS § 601-7, the
 court may [] turn, if appropriate, to the notions of due process
 described in Brown in conducting the broader inquiry of whether
 ‘circumstances . . . fairly give rise to an appearance of
 impropriety and . . . reasonably cast suspicion on the judge’s
 impartiality.’” Id. (quoting Brown, 70 Haw. at 467 n.3, 776 P.2d
 
at 1188 n.3) (ellipses in original) (brackets omitted). The
 decision by the ICA to deny Petitioner’s Motion for Recusal thus
 is reviewed for abuse of discretion. As this court noted in
 Ross, “[d]ecisions on recusal or disqualification present perhaps
 the ultimate test of judicial discretion and should thus lie
 undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of discretion.” Id. at
 
375, 974 P.2d at 15.
 
33(...continued)
affidavit shall state the facts and the reasons for
 
the belief that bias or prejudice exists and shall be
filed before the trial or hearing of the action or
proceeding, or good cause shall be shown for the
failure to file it within such time. No party shall
be entitled in any case to file more than one
affidavit; and no affidavit shall be filed unless
accompanied by a certificate of counsel of record that
the affidavit is made in good faith. Any judge may
disqualify oneself by filing with the clerk of the
court of which the judge is a judge a certificate that
the judge deems oneself unable for any reason to
preside with absolute impartiality in the pending suit
or action.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
60
         
        
         
         
         
        
       
       
        
          
        
          
         
      
        
       
         
          
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A.
 
HRS § 601-7(b) sets forth the procedure for seeking
 
disqualification based on personal bias. The statute requires
 
the movant to timely file an affidavit “stat[ing] the facts and
 reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists.” Id. 
Furthermore, in considering whether the facts allege
 disqualification pursuant to HRS § 601-7, 
a judge whose disqualification is sought must take the
facts alleged as true, but can pass upon whether theyare legally sufficient.” State v. Mata , 71 Haw. 319,
325, 789 P.2d 1122, 1126 (1990). When the affidavit to disqualify refers to matters of record, however, wemay consider the entire record in making ourdetermination. Schutter v. Soong , 76 Hawai 'i 187,
205, 873 P.2d 66, 84 (1994) (citing Peters v.
Jamieson , 48 Haw. 247, 257, 397 P.2d 575, 582 (1964)).
“The reasons and facts for the belief the [affiant]entertains . . . must give fair support to the chargeof a bent of mind that may prevent or impedeimpartiality of judgment.” Whittemore v. Farrington ,
41 Haw. 52, 57 ([Terr.] 1955) (citation omitted). Thetest assumes the viewpoint of a reasonable onlooker,rather than the subjective belief of the judge. See Yorita v. Okumoto , 3 Haw. App. 148, 153, 643 P.2d 820,
825 (1982). 
Ross, 89 Hawai' i at 377, 974 P.2d at 18. 
Bias cannot be premised on adverse rulings alone. Id.
 
at 378, 974 P.2d at 18 (citing Peters, 48 Haw. at 257, 397 P.2d
 
at 583). In Schutter, this court ruled that “[w]here the record
 reflects ‘marked personal feelings . . . on both sides’
 inflicting lingering ‘personal stings’ on the judge (i.e., where
 the case conveys an apparent ‘flavor of animosity on the part of
 the judge against counsel,’ . . . such that the citing judge
 manifestly loses his or her capacity to ‘perform judicial duties
 
61
         
          
         
   
        
          
    
       
      
       
        
           
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
without bias or prejudice,’)[,] the judge should not preside.” 
76 Hawai' i at 205, 873 P.2d at 84 (ellipses in original) (quoting 
Evans v. Takao, 74 Haw. 267, 291-92, 842 P.2d 255, 266 (1992)). 
In the instant case, the record reflects no animosity
 
by Judge Leonard against Petitioner, and instead, the motion to
 disqualify is based solely on a declaration by Petitioner's
 attorney.
34 As discussed, the test is whether a reasonable
 
onlooker would find that the facts, here, as alleged in the
 declaration, are legally sufficient to disqualify the judge. 
Yorita, 3 Haw. App. at 153, 643 P.2d at 825. 
In Jou v. Schmidt, 117 Hawai' i 477, 184 P.3d 792 (App. 
2008), the ICA considered whether Hawai' i Supreme Court Associate 
Justice Sabrina S. McKenna, then a judge on the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, was required to recuse herself from a proceeding in which one of the parties had a seat on the judicial selection committee. The ICA, affirming the denial of the motion for recusal, held that movant’s declaration “failed to include 
34 In support of his Motion for Recusal filed pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 27, Petitioner included the following
declaration from his attorney: 
2.	 I publicly opposed the nomination of Associate JudgeKatherine Leonard of the [ICA] to serve as Chief Justiceof the Hawai 'i Supreme Court. 
3.	 Judge Leonard has recently been assigned to
the above-captioned case as a substitute judge.
 
4.	 I am concerned about the appearance and
potential for partiality raised by having Judge Leonard
participate in a case in which I am lead counsel so soon
after the controversy involving her nomination.
 
62
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
any specific facts regarding Judge McKenna’s retention or
 
petition for retention. Therefore, the sweeping inference that
 Judge McKenna is, ipso facto, biased or prejudiced . . . is
 speculative at best.” Id. at 484, 184 P.3d at 799. In this
 
case, Petitioner also does not set forth specific facts in the
 declaration, beyond speculation that there is the “potential for
 partiality,” as to how Judge Leonard would be biased or
 prejudiced against Petitioner. Thus, even taking the facts
 alleged as true, there is no legal showing that Judge Leonard
 would have a personal bias in this case, under HRS § 601-7.
 
B.
 
In reviewing disqualification actions, a court next 
considers “whether ‘circumstances . . . fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and . . . reasonably cast suspicion on [the judge’s] impartiality.’” Chen v. Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai' i 
346, 362, 279 P.3d 11, 27 (App. 2012) (quoting Ross, 89 Hawai' i 
at 377, 974 P.2d at 17) (brackets and ellipses in original) (other citation omitted). When the ICA considered this issue in Jou, it held that, although the record was silent on whether any commissioner removed herself or himself from Judge McKenna's retention petition, the movant “failed to overcome the presumption that [the commission] acted in accordance with its rules and otherwise failed to establish disqualifying facts in this case.” Jou, 117 Hawai' i at 484, 184 P.3d at 799. 
63
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Similarly, under the circumstances of this case, Petitioner did
 
not establish any disqualifying facts that would reasonably cast
 suspicion on Judge Leonard’s impartiality.
 
In Chen, the ICA reviewed a family court decision in 
which one of the attorneys had been appointed a per diem family court judge after the trial concluded, but before the court issued a decision. 127 Hawai' i at 362, 279 P.3d at 27. The ICA 
held that the presiding judge did not abuse his discretion in denying the motion for his disqualification. Id. The ICA noted 
that the speculative “personal relationship” between the presiding family court judge and an attorney who had been recently appointed as a family court judge “did not give rise to the probability of unfairness or the temptation for the judge to forget the applicable burden of proof.” Id. (citing Ross, 89 
Hawai'i at 379, 974 P.2d at 19). Similarly, in the instant case, 
the involvement of Petitioner’s attorney in Judge Leonard’s nomination process, giving rise to the “appearance and potential for partiality” on the part of Judge Leonard was speculative. No specific facts were alleged that would “give rise to the probability of unfairness or the temptation for the judge to forget the applicable burden of proof.” Id. Thus, the ICA did 
not abuse its discretion in holding that the facts as alleged were not sufficient to warrant Judge Leonard’s recusal. 
64
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
X.
 
We affirm the ICA’s August 10, 2012 judgment and the
 
ICA’s December 6, 2011 order denying Petitioner’s Motion for
 
Recusal, but for the reasons stated herein. 
Further, for the
 
reasons stated herein, we affirm the court’s April 19, 2011
 Amended Final Judgment with respect to its March 29, 2010 and
 June 30, 2010 orders granting summary judgment, and vacate the
 court’s April 19, 2011 Amended Final Judgment with respect to its
 August 23, 2010 Order Granting Plaintiff’s Motion for Review of
 Costs and remand the Order. 
Eric A. Seitz,
Della Au Bellati,
Ronald N.W. Kim,for petitioner
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Dennis K. Ferm,
Caron M. Inagaki,for respondent
  /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Virginia L. Crandall
 
65
 