*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-30142 19-FEB-2014 09:58 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
KAREN GOO, et al.,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs/Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellants/Cross-
Appellees,
 
vs.
 
MAYOR ALAN ARAKAWA, Successor-In-Interest to Mayor Charmaine
Tavares, WILLIAM SPENCE, Director of Planning, County of Maui,
Successor-In-Interest to Director Jeff Hunt, County of Maui
Respondents/Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellees/Cross­
Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
 
and
 
VP AND PK(ML) LLC, KCOM Corp.,
Defendants/Intervenor-Defendants/Cross-Claim
Defendants/Counterclaimants/Cross-Claimants/Appellees/Cross­
Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
 
and
 
KILA KILA CONSTRUCTION,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant,
 
and
 
(John G.) JOHN G’S DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Cross-Claim Defendant,
 
and
 
NEW SAND HILLS LLC.,
Respondent/Defendant/Intervenor-Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-
Claim Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and
 
DAVID B. MERCHANT; JOYCE TAKAHASHI; BRIAN TAKAHASHI,
Defendants/Intervenor-Defendants,
 
and
 
DIANE L. REASER, et al.,
Defendants/Intervenor-Defendants/Counter-Claimants,
 
and
 
HOOKAI, LLC, SANDHILLS ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
Respondents/Intervenors/Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-
Appellants,
 
and
 
CHERYL CABEBE, GERRY RIOPTA, and MELISSA RIOPTA,
Intervenor-Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants.
 
SCWC-30142
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 30142; CIV. NO. 07-1-0258(1))
 
FEBRUARY 19, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This case addresses the issue of the procedure that an
 
appellate court should follow when a case becomes moot on appeal
 
and one party seeks vacatur of the lower court’s judgment.
 
We hold that the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA)
 
erred in vacating the circuit court’s judgments and December 31,
 2008 Order Granting Partial Summary Judgment in this case and
 
-2­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
remanding the case for dismissal. In addition, we conclude that
 
the ICA did not err in affirming the circuit court’s denial of
 
plaintiffs’ request for attorneys’ fees.
 
I. Background 
A.
 
On Maui, approval of development projects is a three-
phase process. Phase I involves approval of ordinances by the
 
Maui County Council (Council) that include prescribing the height
 and density of structures to be built in a project. Phase II
 requires approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning
 Commission. Phase III requires the approval of the final plat by
 the director of the Department of Planning. According to the
 Charter of the County of Maui, the director of the Department of
 Planning is charged with enforcing the zoning ordinances. Maui
 County Charter § 8-8.3(6).
 
Approval of subdivisions requires the approval of
 
various state and county agencies. Ultimately the planning
 director can approve subdivisions if they “conform to . . . the
 county general plan, community plans, land use ordinances, the
 provisions of the Maui County Code, and other laws relating to
 the use of land[.]” Maui County Code § 18.04.030 (1993). 
At the time of the relevant events in this case, Title
 
19, Article II, of the Maui County Code (MCC), known as the
 Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (CZO), stated that “[n]o building
 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
shall exceed two stories nor thirty feet in height.” Prior to
 
September 4, 1991, the CZO “definitions” section defined “height”
 as the “vertical distance from finished grade to the highest
 point of the finished roof surface[.]” (pre-1991 definition) 
(Emphasis added).
 
On September 29, 1988, an application was filed for
 
Phase I approval of the Maui Lani Project District (MLPD). On
 June 20, 1990, the Council enacted Ordinance 1924, which
 constituted Phase 1 approval for the MLPD. MCC Chapter 19.78,
 which codified Ordinance 1924, restricted structures in
 residential sub-districts to “two-stories, not exceeding thirty
 feet.”
 
On September 18, 1990, the MLPD received Phase II
 
approval when the Maui Planning Commission approved the MLPD’s
 preliminary plat site plan. 
B.
 
On September 4, 1991, the Council enacted Ordinance
 
2031 (Height Restriction Law), which changed the definition of
 “building height.” “Height” was defined as “the vertical
 distance measured from a point on the top of a structure to a
 corresponding point directly below on the natural or finish
 grade, whichever is lower.” (post-1991 definition) (Emphasis
 added).
 
-4­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The Height Restriction Law also provided definitions
 
for “natural grade” and “finish grade.” “Natural grade” was
 
defined as “the existing grade or elevation of the ground surface
 which exists or existed prior to man-made alterations such as
 grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating.” “Finish grade” was
 defined as “the final elevation of the ground surface after man-
made alterations such as grading, grubbing, filing, or excavating
 have been made on the ground surface.” 
On October 18, 2003, the Sandhills Project within the
 
MLPD received preliminary subdivision approval, and on March 12,
 2004, it received Phase III approval. According to former
 Planning Director Michael Foley (Planning Director), “[t]he
 Planning Department reviewed the project relative to the finished
 grade and did not consider the effect of fill on building
 heights.” In other words, the Planning Department did not
 calculate fill into the allowable building heights of structures
 in the MLPD.
 
On August 2, 2004, the Department of Public Works and
 
Waste Management issued a Grading and Grubbing Permit for the
 Sandhills project that included a warning that adding fill to any
 lots would “reduce the allowable height to less than 30 feet from
 finished grade.” On the same day, the Fairways project within
 the MLPD received preliminary subdivision approval. The
 preliminary subdivision approval letter for the Fairways project
 
-5­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
included a similar warning concerning the effect of fill on
 
building heights.
 
On December 14, 2004, the Planning Director sent an
 
“Interdepartmental Transmittal” rescinding the Planning
 Department’s recommendation of Phase III approval for the
 Sandhills project based on the fact that the developers who were
 building the project had raised the finished grade of the project
 by adding tons of fill on top of the natural ground, and homes
 built on the fill could violate the Height Restriction Law
 because their rooftops would be higher than 30 feet from the
 lower natural grade. 
On December 22, 2004, as a result of the rescission,
 
representatives of the developers of the Sandhills and Fairways
 projects (collectively, “subject projects”) had a private meeting
 with Mayor Alan Arakawa (Mayor), the Planning Director, and
 numerous representatives from various county agencies. At this
 meeting, the developers expressed their concerns about the
 County’s application of the post-1991 definition of “height” to
 the MLPD and the County’s “rescission” of final subdivision
 approval. The developers expressed their belief that Ordinance
 1924, which had constituted Phase 1 approval for the MLPD,
 authorized the application of the pre-1991 definition of height,
 and the developers had already expended “substantial funds in
 conjunction with the Sandhills project.” 
-6­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As a result of this meeting and various internal
 
communications, the Mayor orally advised the developers that the
 
County “would continue to adhere to [the pre-1991 definition] to
 interpret the height restriction since the Sandhills and the
 Fairways Projects had already received Phase I and Phase II
 Project District Approvals prior to the 1991 enactment of the
 building height restriction amendment and were within the
 [MLPD].” 
On May 31, 2005, the Mayor sent a letter to one of the
 
developers confirming this oral agreement. The Mayor wrote that
 to resolve the conflict over the issue of developments using fill
 with regard to building projects, which were approved before the
 1991 re-definition of height, “I made an administrative decision
 to allow the project to proceed with the building heights
 determined from the finished grade.” The Mayor’s letter went on
 to state, “Project District Phase III approval was granted based
 on this decision.”
 
A copy of this letter was sent to the Planning Director
 
on December 22, 2005, seemingly in response to the Planning
 Director’s inquiry concerning the county’s granting of Phase III
 approval for the Fairways project. By mid-2007, both the
 Sandhills and Fairways projects had received Phase III approval
 pursuant to the Mayor’s decisions.
 
-7­  
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 C. 
On July 18, 2007, in response to the grading and
 
compacting of “tons of dirt” allegedly over thirty feet high and
 
a retaining wall of equal size “loom[ing]” over their houses and
 blocking their view planes over a “pleasant green valley,” Karen
 Goo, et al. (Homeowners), filed a complaint against the Mayor and
 the Planning Director (collectively, “County”) alleging that the
 Mayor had unlawfully exempted the subject projects from the
 Height Restriction Law. The complaint also alleged tort claims
 against the County, defendants VP and PK(ML), KCOM Corp and,
 eventually, New Sand Hills (collectively, “Developers”)
 
1
 alleging. Counts I and II sought declaratory and injunctive
relief requiring the County to enforce the Height Restriction Law
 generally and specifically to projects in the MLPD.
 
On November 16, 2007, Homeowners filed a motion for
 
partial summary judgment (MPSJ). Homeowners’ MPSJ requested an
 order that the County enforce the Height Restriction Law
 definition of “height” on the subject projects, and Developers be
 
1
 In addition to Counts I and II, Homeowners alleged various claims
 
for, inter alia, negligence, nuisance, and intentional and/or negligent
infliction of emotional distress against Developers.  On April 10, 2008, over
the objection of Homeowners, the circuit court bifurcated Counts I and II from
the other claims, and this case proceeded on Counts I and II alone.  The
 circuit court also ruled that only the County would remain a defendant on
Counts I and II.  On May 13, 2008, Developers filed a motion to intervene,
which was granted on June 4, 2008.  Homeowners amended their complaint four
 times.  Defendant New Sand Hills was added as a defendant in an amended
 complaint.
 
-8­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
required to remove any improvements made in violation of the
 
CZO’s post-1991 definition.
 
On December 28, 2007, Developers filed a motion to
 
dismiss Homeowners’ complaint, which the County joined. 
Developers argued, inter alia, that the complaint failed to join
 indispensible parties, specifically “each and every lot owner
 within the [MLPD] permitted after the 1991 Amendment[.]” On
 February 25, 2008, the circuit court partially granted
 Developers’ motion to the extent that the circuit court ordered
 Homeowners to provide notice of the lawsuit to “all lot or real
 property owners within the [MLPD] whose rights would be affected
 should [the circuit court] grant the relief sought by
 [Homeowners] in Counts I and II.” The order required that
 Homeowners personally serve all of these “indispensable parties.”
 
On May 21, 2008, the attorney for Homeowners submitted
 
a declaration confirming that all potential parties-in-interest
 had been notified in accordance with the circuit court’s order. 
A total of 337 parties acknowledged receipt of notice, while 523
 parties received the notice, as indicated by certified mail
 receipts, but had not responded. 
A hearing was held on Homeowners’ MPSJ on December 9,
 
2009. On December 31, 2008, the circuit court issued its
 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 Plaintiffs’ Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Order Granting
 
-9­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Partial Summary Judgment), granting Homeowners’ November 16, 2007
 
MPSJ. In accordance with its Order Granting Partial Summary
 Judgment, the Court ruled that the Height Restriction Law’s
 definition of height applied to all projects in the MLPD and
 enjoined the county from issuing any building permits to projects
 that violated the post-1991 definition. The order stated that
 declaratory relief would apply to the MLPD as a whole; however,
 the circuit court limited the scope of the injunctive relief to
 the Sandhills and Fairways projects, “so that the remedy is no
 more burdensome to Defendant County of Maui than necessary to
 provide complete relief to plaintiffs.” The order decreed:
 
1. The Maui Lani Project District, as a whole, is
subject to the residential height restriction as determined
2
in 1991 and codified at Maui County Code § 19.04.040,  which
states that building height “means the vertical distance
measured from a point on top of a structure to a
corresponding point directly below on the natural or finish
grade, whichever is lower.”
2. Defendant, County of Maui, is enjoined from taking
any action which conflicts with the Court's determination of
the applicable height restriction relative to the Sandhills
project and the Fairways project including, but not limited
to, the issuance of building permits the result of which
would be inconsistent with Maui County Code § 19.04.04.
3. This Order shall remain in effect until further
 
order of the Court.
 
D. 
On January 23, 2009, Homeowners made a motion for
 
attorneys’ fees pursuant to the private attorney general
 
doctrine. Homeowners set forth the three prongs of the private
 attorney general doctrine: “(1) the strength or societal
 
2
 MCC § 19.04.040 refers to the CZO’s “definitions” section.
 
-10­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
importance of the public policy vindicated by the litigation, (2)
 
the necessity for private enforcement and the magnitude of the
 resultant burden on the plaintiff, [and] (3) the number of people
 standing to benefit from the decision.”
3
 
Homeowners argued their lawsuit forced the county to
 
enforce important zoning laws, was necessary because the Mayor
 had acted illegally, a significant burden had fallen upon
 Homeowners because the County and Developers were actively
 opposing Homeowners, and all the people of Maui stood to benefit
 from the court’s ruling.
 
On February 24, 2009, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on the motion for attorneys’ fees. The circuit court concluded
 that Homeowners met the first two prongs of the private attorney
 general doctrine. However, the circuit court found Homeowners
 did not meet the third prong because of the limited immediate
 applicability of the Height Restriction Law to only the subject
 projects within the MLPD and the fact that the offending fill
 blocking Homeowners’ views would not be removed, thus making it
 unclear how many people would benefit from the circuit court’s
 decision.
4
 
3
 In light of our disposition of this case, we do not expand upon
 
the arguments and court rulings concerning the first two prongs of the private
attorney general doctrine.
 
4
 On April 3, 2009, the circuit court filed its order denying
 
Homeowners’ January 23, 2009, motion for attorneys’ fees.
 
-11­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On March 16, 2009, this court decided Sierra Club v. 
Department of Transportation of State of Hawai' i, 120 Hawai' i 181, 
202 P.2d 1226 (2009) (Superferry II). On March 31, 2009, 
Homeowners filed a motion for reconsideration of the denial of their motion for attorneys’ fees. Homeowners argued they met the third prong because their lawsuit benefited the entire population of Maui by promoting the rule of law on Maui through enforcement of the zoning code, emphasized the importance of public participation in the zoning process, and reduced the likelihood of “future developers claiming an exemption from the zoning law after holding a closed-door meeting with the mayor.” 
On April 23, 2009, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Homeowners’ motion for reconsideration. The circuit court found
 that, based on its reading of Superferry II, Homeowners failed to
 satisfy the first prong of the private attorney general doctrine
 as well as the third prong.
 
Concerning the number of people benefitted in relation
 
to the third prong, the circuit court noted Homeowners’ complaint
 concerned only two subdivisions and not a statute of statewide
 application. The circuit court noted further that the entire
 case was limited only to several homeowners living adjacent to
 the projects involved. While recognizing that its ruling had
 county-wide implications, the circuit court observed that more
 people could be harmed by its decision than benefitted because
 
-12­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the owners of property in the MLPD would not be able to build
 
homes.
 
On June 3, 2009, the circuit court entered its order
 
denying Homeowners’ motion for reconsideration.
 
The County and Developers appealed the circuit court’s
 
final judgments.5 Homeowners appealed the circuit court’s
 
denial of attorneys’ fees. 
II. Appellate Proceedings
 
A.
 
On March 19, 2010, Homeowners filed their Opening
 
Brief.6 Homeowners raised a single point of error:
 
Whether the trial court erred in denying Homeowners’ request
for attorneys’ fees against the County under the private
attorney general doctrine. 
Homeowners argued in their Opening Brief that their
 
lawsuit satisfied the third prong of the private attorney general
 
doctrine because it benefitted the entire population of Maui and
 any persons who may purchase property on Maui in the future, and
 denying Homeowners’ request for attorneys’ fees would discourage
 future lawsuits such as theirs. 
On August 28, 2011, after the briefing was submitted to
 
the ICA, the Council adopted a bill that became Ordinance 3848. 
5
 The circuit court issued three final judgments in this case on
 
January 12, 2009, April 3, 2009 and September 30, 2009.
 
6
 Neither the County nor the Developers sought a writ of certiorari
 
from the ICA’s decision in this case.  Similarly Defendant Sandhills Estates
Community Association also filed a cross-appeal, but did not seek review of
the ICA decision.
 
-13­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Karen Goo, et al., v. Mayor Alan Arakawa, et al., No. SCWC-30142,
 
2013 WL 5289010, at *3 (App. Oct. 7, 2013) (mem.). Ordinance
 3848 amended the CZO’s definition of height to the following:
 “[f]or structures within project districts that received phase II
 approval prior to September 4, 1991, finish grade shall be used
 to determine height.” Goo, 2013 WL 5289010, at *3. On June 12,
 
2013, the ICA ordered the parties to file supplemental briefs on
 the question of “whether, in light of Ordinance 3848, any of the
 issues raised on appeal are moot.” 
Id. at *4 . The ICA’s
 
supplemental briefing order did not require the parties to brief
 the issue of vacatur. 
On June 28, 2013, Homeowners filed their supplemental
 
brief. Homeowners argued that all of the issues raised by the
 County and Developers were moot because Ordinance 3848 granted
 the County and Developers the exact relief they requested, namely
 allowing the subject projects to measure building height from
 finished grade.
 
Homeowners contended, however, that their appeal
 
concerning attorneys’ fees was not moot. Homeowners argued that
 it would be absurd to allow the County’s passage of a law making
 previously illegal conduct legal to defeat a claim for attorneys’
 fees under the private attorney general doctrine with regard to a
 lawsuit that forced the change in the law. 
On July 2, 2013, both the County and Developers
 
-14­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
submitted their supplemental briefs. The County argued that its
 
appeal and Homeowners’ appeals were moot. The County contended,
 however, that Homeowners’ appeal concerning attorneys’ fees was
 also moot. 
The County argued further that the ICA should vacate
 
the circuit court’s decision because “merely dismissing the
 appeal due to mootness could result in the trial court’s judgment
 imposing collateral estoppel.” The County argued that it was not
 issuing building permits for the subject projects because of the
 circuit court’s 2008 order. Therefore, the County requested that
 the order be vacated so that building could proceed pursuant to
 Ordinance 3848. 
Developers also contended in their memorandum that the
 
case was not moot because the County was not issuing building
 permits.
 
B.
 
The ICA issued its Memorandum Opinion on September 19,
 
2013. The ICA found that Ordinance 3848 settled the primary
 issue of whether the “pre-1991 definition of height or the more
 restrictive 1991 definition of height applies to the [subject
 projects] within the [MLPD]” and, thus, that issue was moot. 
Goo, 2013 WL 5289010, at *5-6. 
-15­ 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ICA stated that Developers’ concerns “should be
 
assuaged” by its decision to vacate the circuit court’s order and
 
judgments. Id. at *7 n.9, *8.
 
The ICA’s analysis with respect to the issue of vacatur
 
was as follows: 
As recognized in Aircall of Haw., Inc. v. Home Props., Inc.,
6 Haw App. 593, 733 P.2d 1231 (1987), “where appellate
review has been frustrated due to mootness[,]” the circuit
court’s judgment, which is unreviewable because of mootness,
could lead to issue preclusion.  Id. at 595, 733 P.2d at
 1232.  In Aircall of Haw. , and subsequently, in Exit Co.
Ltd. P’ship v. Airlines Capital Corp., 7 Haw. App. 363, 766
P.2d 129 (1988), this court noted that such a result would
be unfair and resolved the potential for issue preclusion
where a case is rendered moot on appeal by adopting “the
federal practice of having the appellate court vacate the
judgment of the trial court and direct dismissal of the
case.”  Exit Co., 7 Haw. App. at 367, 766 P.2d at 131
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  We
 likewise apply this resolution to the present case.  
Id. at *8. Thus, because appellate review of the Height
 
Restriction Law issue was frustrated based on mootness and the
 
judgment had the potential to “lead to issue preclusion,” the ICA
 vacated the circuit court’s December 31, 2008 Order Granting
 
7
 Partial Summary Judgment and final judgments with respect to
Counts I and II of Homeowners’ complaint for Declaratory and
 Injunctive Relief. Id. at *8. The ICA remanded the case to the
 
circuit court with orders to dismiss the action. Id. 
The ICA found that Homeowners’ appeal concerning
 
attorneys’ fees was not moot, but concluded that Homeowners
 failed to meet the first and third prongs of the private attorney
 
7
 It appears the ICA did not vacate the circuit court’s April 3,
 
2009 final judgment.
 
-16­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
general doctrine.8 Id. at *9. On the third prong, the ICA found
 
that the number of people benefitting from the circuit court’s
 
ruling was unclear, probably limited, and the three-prong test of
 the private attorney general doctrine was intended to constrain
 the doctrine’s application to “exceptional circumstances.” Id. 
Therefore, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did not abuse
 its discretion in denying Homeowners’ motions for attorneys’
 fees, and affirmed the circuit court’s April 3, 2009 order
 denying Homeowners’ motion for attorneys’ fees. Id. at *12.
 
On September 27, 2013, Homeowners filed a timely motion
 
for reconsideration addressing the ICA’s vacation of the circuit
 court’s judgments and order, and attaching what they stated were
 meeting minutes created after the circuit court’s judgment that
 showed Ordinance 3848 was only passed as part of a “global
 settlement.” The ICA denied the motion. 
III. Application for Writ of Certiorari
 
A.
 
On October 25, 2013, Homeowners timely filed their
 
application for writ of certiorari (Application) and present the
 following questions:
 
A. Whether the declaratory judgment obtained by Homeowners
should be vacated and dismissed because the County’s [sic]
caused the mooting of the underlying controversy, or are
Homeowners entitled to keep the record of their success as
 
8
 The ICA did not address the second prong because it found
 
Homeowners failed to meet the first and third prongs.  Goo, 2013 WL 5289010,
 
at *10.
 
-17­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the prevailing party and to guide government officials in
the future regarding the challenged illegal actions?
 
B. Whether Homeowners are entitled to their attorney’s fees
against the County under the private attorney general
doctrine because their suit vindicated important public
interests and benefitted the public broadly by compelling
the County to faithfully and equally enforce its zoning
laws, instead of exempting favored persons from the law’s
reach?
 
Homeowners argue the ICA erred in vacating the circuit
 
court’s “declaratory judgment.” Homeowners agree the appeals of
 
the County and Developers were moot, but contend that if a party
 to a suit causes the mootness, that party’s actions preclude the
 equitable remedy of vacatur. Citing to “Minutes of Maui County
 Council Planning Committee,” Homeowners maintain that the County
 passed Ordinance 3848 as part of a “global settlement” of various
 lawsuits concerning the post-1991 definition of height and its
 effects on the subject projects. Homeowners also quote “a County
 attorney” testifying before the Council recommending the passage
 of Ordinance 3848 so as to correct the decision of the circuit
 court in this case.
9
 
Thus, Homeowners, relying on U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co.
 
v. Bonner Mall Partnership, 513 U.S. 18, 25 (1994), argue that
 vacatur was inappropriate in this case because the mootness of
 the primary issue did not occur through happenstance but rather
 as the result of a concerted effort by the County and Developers
 to circumvent the circuit court’s decision. Homeowners
 
9
 These documents were apparently created after Council meetings in
 
2011 and 2009, respectively.  The circuit court rendered its ruling against
the County and Developers in 2008. 
-18­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
acknowledge that the injunction can be vacated, but argue the
 
declaratory judgment should be kept in place as recognition of
 Homeowners’ challenge to the Mayor’s illegal conduct and their
 vindication of the important public policy of equal enforcement
 of zoning laws. 
Homeowners also contend the ICA erred in affirming the
 
circuit court’s denial of attorneys’ fees, arguing that denying
 their request for attorneys’ fees would have a chilling effect on
 lawsuits filed by “ordinary” people seeking to enforce zoning
 laws. Homeowners maintain their personal interest in the outcome
 did not preclude an award of fees under the private attorney
 general doctrine. They argue further that the hundreds of
 notices the circuit court ordered Homeowners to mail demonstrated
 that the case had a widespread effect. 
B.
 
The County, in its Response to Homeowners’ Application,
 
argues that the vacatur by the ICA was proper. The County reasons
 that the Maui County Council is an independent branch of
 government from the County executive branch defendants and thus,
 regardless of lobbying by the executive branch, the County “is in
 a position akin to a party who finds its case mooted on appeal by
 ‘happenstance,’ rather than by events within its control.”
 
-19­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The County maintains that the ICA properly found that
 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 
Homeowners attorneys’ fees. 
Developers in their Response to Homeowners’ Application
 
also argue that vacatur was proper because the underlying appeal
 was moot. In addition to arguments made by the County,
 Developers maintain that Homeowners’ citations to the Maui County
 Council Planning Committee Reports and Minutes were inappropriate
 because they were not accompanied with citations to the Record on
 Appeal. Developers also contend that Homeowners were judicially
 estopped from arguing against the vacatur of the circuit court’s
 declaratory judgment because Homeowners argued in their
 supplemental briefing on mootness that all issues in the case
 were moot, and they did not ask the ICA to affirm the circuit
 court’s declaratory judgment. 
Further, Developers assert that lot owners who cannot
 
build on their lots may sue Developers and rely on the circuit
 court’s declaratory judgment “for the proposition that the law at
 the time the lot owners purchased their lots prohibited or
 limited construction on lots with fill.” This would result in
 Developers being unfairly “forced to expend time, effort, and
 expense defending against the legal claims that would likely
 arise if the declaratory judgment is not vacated.” 
-20­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C.
 
Homeowners replied to both the County’s and Developers’
 
responses. Homeowners contend that because the County was
 
defending an illegal action by the Mayor, rather than a pre­existing law, the Council’s passing of an ordinance retroactively
 legalizing the Mayor’s conduct amounted to a voluntary action by
 the County to moot this case. Homeowners argue that vacatur is
 an equitable remedy, and the action by the Council to legalize
 the Mayor’s illegal conduct did not entitle the County to such a
 remedy. 
In reply to Developers, Homeowners argue that they
 
brought the issue of vacatur to the attention of the ICA in their
 motion for reconsideration. Homeowners maintain that the ICA did
 not order them to brief the issue of vacatur, and the first
 chance Homeowners had to raise the issue was in their motion for
 reconsideration. Homeowners contend that the Meeting Minutes
 they referenced could not be part of the Record on Appeal as the
 minutes were created after the Record on Appeal was created. 
Finally, Homeowners conclude that vacatur of the declaratory
 judgment was a “last slap in the faces of [Homeowners] . . . who
 sought judicial recognition that the mayor’s actions were
 contrary to law[.]” Thus, Homeowners request that this court
 “remand the matter to the trial court for further proceedings
 
-21­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
regarding the effect of [Ordinance 3848] on the injunction but
 
preserving the Declaratory Judgment[.]”
 
IV. Discussion 
A. Vacatur 
1. 
In U.S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner Mall
 
Partnership, 513 U.S. 18, 22 (1994), the Supreme Court held that
 in cases where “a judgment has become moot while awaiting review,
 this Court may not consider its merits, but may make such
 disposition of the whole case as justice may require.” The Court
 explained that vacatur is an “extraordinary remedy.” Id. at 26
 
(brackets omitted). 
In Bancorp, at issue was whether vacatur should be
 
granted where mootness results from a settlement agreement
 between the parties. Id. at 20. In resolving this question, the
 
Court first noted that in the prior leading case on vacatur,
 United States v. Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U.S. 36 (1950), the Court
 had stated that vacatur “clears the path for future relitigation
 of the issues between the parties and eliminates a judgment,
 review of which was prevented through happenstance.” Bancorp,
 
513 U.S. at 22-23 (quoting 340 U.S. at 40). The parties in
 Bancorp had agreed that pursuant to Munsingwear, vacatur must be
 ordered for judgments rendered moot “through happenstance”; that
 is, “where a controversy presented for review has become moot due
 
-22­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to circumstances unattributable to any of the parties.” Id. at
 
23 (quotation marks omitted). However, the Court disagreed,
 
characterizing the reference to “happenstance” in Munsingwear as
 “dictum.” Id. at 23. 
In any event, the Bancorp Court held that the
 
“principles that have always been implicit in our treatment of
 moot cases counsel against extending Munsingwear to settlement,”
 as the Court had always “disposed of moot cases in the manner
 most consonant to justice in view of the nature and character of
 the conditions which have caused the case to become moot.” Id.
 
at 24 (quotation marks and ellipses omitted). “The reference to
 ‘happenstance’ in Munsingwear” was merely an “allusion to this
 equitable tradition of vacatur,” given that “[a] party who seeks
 review of the merits of an adverse ruling, but is frustrated by
 the vagaries of circumstance, ought not in fairness be forced to
 acquiesce in the judgment.” Id. at 25. 
Thus, “[t]he principal condition to which [the Court]
 
looked [was] whether the party seeking relief from the judgment
 below caused the mootness by voluntary action.” Id. at 24. The
 
Court emphasized that the settlement of a case is not a result of
 “happenstance,” but a voluntary act of the parties. Id. at 23­
27. The Court held that “[w]here mootness results from
 
settlement . . . the losing party has voluntarily forfeited his
 legal remedy by the ordinary processes of appeal or certiorari,
 
-23­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
thereby surrendering his claim to the equitable remedy of
 
vacatur.” Id. at 25. 
Additionally, the Court explained that its holding
 
“must also take account of the public interest,” which “requires”
 that the “demands of orderly procedure [of appeal] . . . be
 honored when they can.” Id. at 26-27. The Court declared,
 
“[j]udicial precedents are presumptively correct and valuable to
 the legal community as a whole. They are not merely the property
 of private litigants and should stand unless a court concludes
 that the public interest would be served by a vacatur.” Id. at
 
26 (quotation marks and citation omitted). Because the primary
 route for parties to seek relief from judgments was through
 appeal and certiorari, “[t]o allow a party who steps off the
 statutory path to employ the secondary remedy of vacatur as a
 refined form of collateral attack on the judgment would—quite
 apart from any considerations of fairness to the parties—disturb
 the orderly operation of the federal judicial system.” Id. at
 
27. 
The Bancorp Court thus held that where a case has
 
become moot because the losing party voluntarily abandoned its
 right of review, e.g., through settlement, vacatur is not
 justified, although “exceptional circumstances may conceivably
 counsel in favor of such a course.” Id. at 29. Moreover, the
 
Court held that, in all situations, the party requesting relief
 
-24­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
from the status quo had the burden of proving “equitable
 
entitlement to the extraordinary remedy of vacatur.” Id. at 26.
 
Finally, the Court determined that “even in the absence of, or
 before considering the existence of, extraordinary circumstances,
 a court of appeals presented with a request for vacatur of a
 district-court judgment may remand the case with instructions
 that the district court consider the request, which it may do
 pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b).” Id. at 29. 
Thus, Bancorp established a presumption against vacatur
 
in situations where the party requesting vacatur voluntarily
 caused the case to become moot. The case also overruled what had
 become a federal practice under Munsingwear, of automatically
 vacating judgments that had become moot on appeal so as to avoid
 issue preclusion attaching to a judgment that could not be
 reviewed on appeal. 340 U.S. at 39-40. See also Valero
 
Terrestrial Corp. v. Paige, 211 F.3d 112, 120 (4th Cir. 2000) (in
 the forty-four years between the Court’s decision in
 
Munsingwear and its decision in Bancorp, the prevailing practice
 among district courts was to follow the appellate court practice
 
of automatically vacating moot judgments, pursuant to
 Munsingwear). 
This practice had led to a situation where “repeat
 
litigants,” such as insurance companies, were settling cases
 after losing at the trial level against “one-time litigants,”
 
-25­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
such as policy-holders, but only on the condition that judgments
 
adverse to the interests of the repeat litigant were vacated. 
Eugene R. Anderson, et. al., Out of the Frying Pan and into the
 Fire: The Emergence of Depublication in the Wake of Vacatur, 4 J.
 App. Prac. & Process 475, 476 (2002). Thus, “[t]hrough vacatur,
 insurance companies [could] eradicate or reduce the number of
 pro-policy holder decisions and then argue that the weight of
 authority [was] in their favor.”
10
 
Bancorp responded to this practice by holding that
 
appellate courts could no longer vacate lower court judgments
 based solely on a settlement agreement, which represents a
 voluntary abandonment of the right to appellate review, absent
 “exceptional” or “extraordinary” circumstances. While Bancorp
 preserved Munsingwear’s dictum that mootness resulting from
 “happenstance” provides sufficient reason to vacate, 513 U.S. at
 25 n.3, the Court clearly emphasized the need to consider the
 public interest in preserving judicial precedents and “the
 orderly operation of the federal judicial system” when granting
 equitable relief such as vacatur. 513 U.S. at 26-27. 
Furthermore, as noted, Bancorp explicitly states that, even
 before considering the existence or absence of “extraordinary
 
10
 Cf. Am. Games, Inc. v. Trade Prods., Inc., 142 F.3d 1164, 1170
 
(9th Cir. 1998) (finding that in cases of merger, the courts should evaluate
the “economics and incentives of the transaction to smoke out” whether the
 merging parties are manipulating the common law through a “buy and bury”
strategy of vacating adverse judgments through merger).
 
-26­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circumstances,” an appellate court presented with a request for
 
vacatur may remand to the trial court pursuant to the federal
 rules. Id. at 29. Thus, Bancorp clearly allows an appellate
 
court to weigh the equities of vacatur or to simply remand to the
 trial court to determine whether a judgment should be vacated
 based upon consideration of the equities in the case. 
The Ninth Circuit’s decision in American Games, Inc. v.
 
Trade Products, Inc., 142 F.3d 1164 (9th Cir. 1998), demonstrates
 the value in an appellate court having the option of remanding in
 situations where a case has become moot, even by happenstance. 
In that case, a district court judgment resolving a controversy
 between two parties was mooted while the case was on appeal to
 the Ninth Circuit, due to an “asset sale that effectively merged
 the two companies.” Id. at 1165-66. The parties then “requested
 
dismissal of the appeal and vacation of the district court
 judgment.” Id. at 1166. Rather than weighing the equities of
 
vacatur, the Ninth Circuit dismissed the appeal and remanded the
 case to the district court “for the purpose of considering the
 motion for vacatur.” Id. 
On remand, the district court allowed a third-party
 
corporation that had an interest in the preclusionary value of
 the mooted judgment to intervene and argue against vacatur. Id.
 
at 1166-67. The defendant-corporation (the result of the
 merger), argued that the judgment should be vacated pursuant to
 
-27­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Munsingwear because the merger was “happenstance.” Id. at 1166. 
The district court decided that the case “[fell] somewhere
 
between [Bancorp] (mootness by settlement) and [Munsingwear]
 (mootness by happenstance).” Id. However, after balancing the
 
equities, the district court found that the “merger was motivated
 by legitimate business reasons only incidental to the mooted
 case, and not for the purpose of settling the case.” Id. The
 
district court thus issued the vacatur order. Id. The Ninth
 
Circuit affirmed the vacatur order, holding that due to the
 “fact-intensive” nature of the “happenstance” inquiry, the
 district court could conduct an equitable balancing test instead
 of an “extraordinary circumstances” test. Id. at 1169-70. 
Am. Games thus exemplifies how factually complex a
 
“happenstance” vs. “voluntary” analysis can be. Am. Games also
 
demonstrates how, through the “orderly operation of the federal
 judicial system,” Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 27, appellate courts can
 utilize remand to trial courts to develop a fuller record before
 deciding the issue of vacatur. 
The concurrence in Keahole Defense Coalition, Inc. v. 
Board of Land & Natural Resources, 110 Hawai' i 419, 437, 134 P.3d 
585, 603 (2006) (Del Rosario, Circuit Judge, concurring),
11 also 
recognized that the Bancorp “exceptional circumstances” test 
11
 Justice Acoba wrote the majority opinion and joined the concurring
 
opinion.
 
-28­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
applied only to appellate court vacatur. Id. Citing to Am.
 
Games, the concurrence explained that trial courts, on the other
 
hand, could vacate their own judgments based on an equitable
 balancing test, even in the presence of voluntary action by the
 party requesting vacatur. Id. (citing 142 F.3d at 1169-70).
 
In this case, the ICA held that vacatur was proper
 
because, “‘where appellate review has been frustrated due to
 mootness[,]’ the circuit court’s judgment, which is unreviewable
 because of mootness, could lead to issue preclusion.” Goo, 2013
 
WL 5289010, at *8 (citing Aircall of Haw., Inc. v. Home Props.,
 Inc., 6 Haw App. 593, 733 P.2d 1231 (1987)). The ICA concluded,
 based on Exit Co. Ltd. Partnership v. Airlines Capital Corp., 7
 Haw. App. 363, 367, 766 P.2d 129, 131 (1988), which in turn cited
 to Aircall, that such a result would be unfair to defendants and
 resolved this unfairness “by adopting ‘the federal practice of
 having the appellate court vacate the judgment of the trial court
 and direct dismissal of the case.’” Goo, 2013 WL 5289010, at *8
 
(quoting Exit Co., 7 Haw. App. at 367, 766 P.2d at 131). 
Aircall, however, relied on Munsingwear to justify the
 
“practice” of appellate courts vacating moot trial court
 judgments solely to avoid issue preclusion. 6 Haw App. at 595,
 733 P.2d at 1233 (“Vacation of the [circuit court’s order] and
 remand of the case to the circuit court with direction to dismiss
 the action will prevent the . . . Order, which is ‘unreviewable
 
-29­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
because of mootness, from spawning any legal consequences.’ 
[Munsingwear], 340 U.S. at 41[.]”). However, as set forth above,
 Bancorp essentially abolished this federal practice. 
In its place, Bancorp established the “extraordinary
 
circumstances” test for appellate court vacatur of lower court
 judgments rendered moot by the voluntary actions of the parties,
 and directed federal appellate courts to “take account of the
 public interest” before vacating cases mooted by “happenstance.” 
The procedural history in Am. Games demonstrated further that
 even cases apparently mooted on appeal by “happenstance” may
 require “fact-intensive” inquiries that are best left to trial
 courts to resolve. 
Here, the ICA did not evaluate whether the Council’s
 
passage of the ordinance was “happenstance,” an action not
 attributable to the voluntary action of the parties, which would
 have justified vacatur under Munsingwear as affirmed by Bancorp. 
Munsingwear, 340 U.S. at 39-40; Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 25 n.3. The
 ICA did not explain how the defendants carried their burden of
 establishing their “equitable entitlement to the extraordinary
 remedy of vacatur.” Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 26. Finally, the ICA
 
did not “take account” of how vacatur would serve the public
 interest. Id. at 26-27. 
Homeowners also maintain their motion for
 
reconsideration was the first opportunity they had to address the
 
-30­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12
 question of vacatur,  and Ordinance 3848 was passed only as part
of a “global settlement.” Homeowners also quoted what was
 contended to be “Minutes of Maui County Council Planning
 Committee” purporting to show that Ordinance 3848 was part of
 this settlement, but the Minutes were not in the record because
 the case became moot after the record was developed. Although
 the record would not be able to reflect the existence of such a
 settlement because the case became moot due to actions taken by
 the Council after the appeal was taken, if a settlement agreement
 had been demonstrated the ICA would have had to find
 “extraordinary circumstances” to justify vacatur under Bancorp. 
513 U.S. at 29. 
Thus, the ICA did not properly analyze the vacatur
 
issue. 
2.
 
The County and Homeowners agree that the circuit
 
court’s judgment was rendered moot as a result of the Council’s
 enactment of Ordinance 3848. They also agree that the injunction
 can be vacated. Homeowners argue, however, that the Council’s
 passage of Ordinance 3848 was attributable to the County because
 the County lobbied for its passage, Ordinance 3848 was part of a
 
12
 The ICA’s supplemental briefing order did not require the parties
 
to brief the issue of vacatur.  Additionally, Homeowners filed their
supplemental brief before the County and Developers, and thus did not have an
opportunity to respond to the defendants’ requests for vacatur in their
briefs.  Thus, Developers’ argument that Homeowners waived their right to
argue against vacatur is without merit.
 
-31­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“global settlement,” and the County was defending an illegal
 
action by the Mayor as opposed to an existing law. The County
 counters that actions of the legislative branch were not
 attributable to the executive branch, and thus the County “is in
 a position akin to a party who finds its case mooted on appeal by
 ‘happenstance,’ rather than by events within its control.” 
Regardless of which party is correct, this is precisely
 
the type of equity-balancing, fact-intensive situation that is
 best left to the circuit court to evaluate. Because this case
 became moot while on appeal, Goo, 2013 WL 5289010, at *3, the
 parties did not have an opportunity to adduce evidence, present
 memoranda, or make arguments to the circuit court judge, who
 would have been in the best position to make factual
 determinations as to the cause of the mootness and to balance the
 equities of the case. The record on the vacatur issue is not
 only incomplete, it is virtually non-existent, as all, or
 virtually all, of the actions resulting in the case becoming moot
 occurred after the appeals were filed. 
A remand to the lower court is commonly invoked by
 
appellate courts when a case becomes moot while awaiting a
 decision on appeal. See Am. Games, 142 F.3d at 1168 (describing
 
the Ninth Circuit’s “established procedure of remanding so the
 district court can decide whether to vacate its judgment in light
 of the consequences and attendant hardships of dismissal or
 
-32­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
refusal to dismiss and the competing values of finality of
 
judgment and right to relitigation of unreviewed disputes”
 (quotation marks omitted)). 
Given the “fact-intensive” nature of the inquiry into
 
whether the party seeking vacatur caused the case to become moot,
 a trial court is better equipped than an appellate court
 operating at a distance to fashion equitable relief. See id. at
 
1170 (“Given the fact-intensive nature of the inquiry required,
 it seems appropriate that a district court should enjoy greater
 equitable discretion when reviewing its own judgments than do
 appellate courts operating at a distance.”). See also Rio Grande
 
Silvery Minnow v. Bureau of Reclamation, 601 F.3d 1096, 1139
 (10th Cir. 2010) (Henry, J., dissenting) (“the district court is
 better equipped than we are to fashion equitable relief, and we
 afford it considerable discretion in doing so”). Remand to the
 lower court also better protects the “orderly operation of the
 judicial system” by leaving fact-finding powers with the trial
 courts and review of the trial courts’ discretion to the
 appellate courts. Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 27. 
Moreover, unlike an appellate court that is more likely
 
to be in the position of rendering an “all or nothing”
 determination (vacating or not vacating), a lower court may
 modify a judgment to address the interests of both parties.
 
-33­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, the better rule to apply is that, when a case
 
becomes moot on appeal and the trial court has not had an
 
opportunity to evaluate a motion for vacatur, the appellate
 court, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, should remand
 the case to the trial court to give the court the first
 opportunity to evaluate the cause of the mootness based on a
 complete record. 
Bancorp’s preservation of Munsingwear’s “happenstance”
 
analysis is, in practice, impractical. As shown by Am. Games,
 even the analysis of “happenstance” is “fact-intensive.” 142
 F.3d at 1170. Additionally, if a case became moot while on
 appeal, there would likely be no record on which an appellate
 court could properly analyze whether the “controversy . . . has
 become moot due to circumstances unattributable to the parties.” 
Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 23.
 
Enabling the trial court to evaluate the issue first,
 
and perhaps reach a middle ground, or allow agreement of the
 parties, would also be consistent with the policy of preserving
 judgments. Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 26-27 (judicial precedents are
 
valuable to the legal community as a whole). A remand to the
 trial court also furthers the interests of judicial economy, as
 it avoids a situation in which an appellate court analyzes a
 motion for vacatur, denies it, and then a party below files an
 
-34­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for vacatur in the circuit court.13 Am.
 
Games, 142 F.3d at 1169 (“[A trial court] is not precluded by [an
 
appellate court’s denial of a request for vacatur] from vacating
 its own judgment after an independent review of the equities, and
 we therefore follow our established practice of remanding the
 case to the [trial court] for such a determination.” (quoting
 Cammermeyer v. Perry, 97 F.3d 1235, 1239 (9th Cir. 1996))).
 
Accordingly, when a case is mooted while on appeal, the
 
appellate court should, absent exceptional circumstances, remand
 the case to the trial court for a consideration of the vacatur
 issue. 
3.
 
The ICA erred by vacating the circuit court’s December
 
31, 2008 Order Granting Partial Summary Judgment and judgments
 and remanding to the court for dismissal given that the more
 equitable rule for cases that have been rendered moot on appeal
 
13 HRCP Rule 60(b) provides:
 
On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may
relieve a party or a party’s legal representative from a
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following
reasons:
 
. . . .
 (5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer
equitable that the judgment should have prospective
application; or (6) any other reason justifying relief from
the operation of the judgment.
 
-35­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
is for appellate courts, in the absence of extraordinary 
circumstances, to remand to the trial court to evaluate the issue of vacatur based upon a developed record. The case should have therefore been remanded to the circuit court to allow that court an opportunity to consider an HRCP Rule 60(b) motion for vacatur. The circuit court may then make factual findings, balance the equities of the case, and exercise its discretion as to whether its own judgment should be vacated in whole or in part. Am. 
Games, 142 F.3d at 1168, 1170. See also Keahole, 110 Hawai' i at 
437, 134 P.3d at 603 (Del Rosario, Circuit Judge, concurring); Bancorp, 513 U.S. at 29. 
B. Private Attorney General Doctrine
 
“[N]ormally, pursuant to the ‘American Rule,’ each 
party is responsible for paying his or her litigation expenses.” Superferry II, 120 Hawai' i at 218, 202 P.3d at 1263 (quotation 
marks, brackets and citation omitted). This general rule is subject to several exceptions, including the private attorney general doctrine. Id. 
The private attorney general doctrine “is an equitable 
rule that allows courts in their discretion to award [attorneys’] fees to plaintiffs who have vindicated important public rights.” Id. (quoting Maui Tomorrow v. State, 110 Hawai' i 234, 244, 131 
P.3d 517, 527 (2006)). Courts applying this doctrine consider three basic factors: “(1) the strength or societal importance of 
-36­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the public policy vindicated by the litigation, (2) the necessity 
for private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden on the plaintiff, (3) the number of people standing to benefit from the decision.” Superferry II, 120 Hawai' i at 218, 202 P.3d 
at 1263. All three prongs must be satisfied by the party seeking attorneys’ fees. See Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 31, 25 P.3d at 
806 (although the parties satisfied the first and third prongs, failure to satisfy the second prong meant the private attorney general doctrine did not apply). Maui Tomorrow, 110 Hawai' i at 
245, 131 P.3d at 528 (the private attorney general doctrine did not apply because the plaintiffs’ case failed to satisfy the second prong of the private attorney general doctrine). 
The circuit court in this case denied attorneys’ fees
 
to Homeowners, holding that Homeowners failed to satisfy the
 first and third factors of the doctrine. The ICA agreed with the
 circuit court’s analysis and affirmed the court’s order denying
 Homeowners’ motion for attorneys’ fees. Goo, 2013 WL 5289010, at
 
*8-12.
 
This court reviews circuit court awards of attorneys’ 
fees under the abuse of discretion standard. Honolulu Const. & 
Draying Co., Ltd. v. State, Dep't of Land & Natural Res. (Irwin Park II), 130 Hawai' i 306, 313, 310 P.3d 301, 308 (2013). 
However, “we review de novo whether the trial court disregarded rules or principles of law that arise in deciding whether or not 
-37­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a party satisfies the three factors of the private attorney
 
general doctrine.” Id.
 
In Waiahole II, the court held that the third prong of 
the private attorney general doctrine appeared to be met, as the case “involved constitutional rights of profound significance, and all of the citizens of the state, present and future, stood to benefit from the decision.” 96 Hawai' i at 31, 25 P.3d at 806. 
The court found the impact of the decision similar to cases in other jurisdictions that applied the doctrine to award fees in situations involving the public trust doctrine. Id. 
In Superferry II, the third criterion was satisfied 
because the underlying action resulted in “generally applicable law that established procedural standing in environmental law and clarified the need to address secondary impacts in environmental review[.]” 120 Hawai' i at 221, 202 P.3d at 1266. Thus, the 
decision would “benefit large numbers of people over long periods of time.” Id. The court in the underlying case had expressly 
stated that “‘[a]ll parties involved and society as a whole’ would have benefitted had the public been allowed to participate in the review process of the Superferry project, as was envisioned by the legislature when it enacted the Hawai' i 
Environmental Policy Act.” Id. (quoting Sierra Club I, 115 
Hawai'i at 343, 167 P.3d at 336)). 
-38­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Similarly in Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, the third prong was 
satisfied because the court’s opinion “established ‘generally 
applicable law’ regarding standing to enforce historic preservation laws” and ensure that such laws would be enforced as written, “for the public good” and “in the public interest[.]” 129 Hawai' i 454, 466, 304 P.3d 252, 264 (2013). The court in 
Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Commission also found the third prong satisfied where the underlying decision allowed the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands to shift funding from administrative expenses to operating expenses, thereby “provid[ing] a benefit to the Hawaiian Home Lands trust, impacting at least the tens of thousands of known beneficiaries on the waiting list, and ultimately benefitting the State as a whole, because stewardship of Hawaiian Home Lands was an obligation taken on by the State as a condition for admission into the union.” 130 Hawai' i 162, 167­
68, 307 P.3d 142, 147-48 (2013). 
In Irwin Park II, the court considered the application 
of the third prong in “a situation where the public policy involves a discrete property or historic site open to the general public.” 130 Hawai' i at 317-18, 310 P.3d at 312-13. The court 
explained that the underlying decision, which denied a petition to expunge a deed restriction requiring a historic site to be preserved as a public park, resulted in “benefits [that] would clearly accrue to residents and tourists who visit the Aloha 
-39­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Tower area through the continued preservation of Irwin Park.” 
Id. at 318, 310 P.3d at 313. 
The court recognized that the case “involved a discrete
 
determination, rather than a direct challenge to a law or
 policy.” Id. However, although the “litigation concerned a
 
specific property, . . . the result vindicated the dedication of
 public parks and historic sites across the state.” Id. The
 
court noted that the litigation prevented the state agency from
 “altering a historic site and acting in contravention” of
 applicable laws and the original grantor’s intent in dedicating
 the property to be used as a public park. Id. at 318-19, 310
 
P.3d at 313-14. Thus, the case had “general precedential value
 for enforcing governmental adherence to the dedication of private
 land for public parks and as historic sites, and for the
 enforcement of the government’s commitments to the preservation
 of such parks and historic sites.” Id. at 319, 310 P.3d at 314. 
This case in contrast did not involve the enforcement
 
of a law of general state-wide applicability, did not benefit a
 substantial number of people on a scale comparable to decisions
 such as Superferry II or Waiahole II, and lacks general
 precedential value. 
The circuit court’s order in this case established that
 
the MLPD as a whole was subject to the Height Restriction Law. 
The circuit court enjoined the County from taking any action that
 
-40­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
would conflict with the court’s determination of the applicable
 
height restrictions, as applied to the MLPD. Thus, the direct
 impact of the court’s order was limited to the MLPD subdivisions.
 
Even within the MLPD, as the circuit court recognized,
 
it was “very unclear” how many people would actually benefit from
 the court’s ruling that the Height Restriction Law applied. The
 court’s ruling did not result in removing the improvements that
 blocked Homeowners’ view, and did not benefit the other lot
 owners within the MLPD who were prevented from building homes on
 their property. 
Finally, this case involved private property and lacks
 
precedential value, given the subsequent enactment that modified
 the Height Restriction Law by establishing that the pre-1991
 height definition governed project districts that received phase
 II approval prior to September 4, 1991. 
Accordingly, this case does not satisfy the third prong 
of the private attorney general doctrine pertaining to the number of people standing to benefit from the decision. Because we find that Homeowners’ failed to satisfy the third prong of the private attorney general doctrine, we do not examine the first two prongs. Waiahole II, 96 Hawai' i at 31, 25 P.3d at 806; Maui 
Tomorrow, 110 Hawai' i at 245, 131 P.3d at 528. Thus, the ICA did 
not err in finding that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Homeowners’ request for attorneys’ fees. 
-41­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
V. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate that portion of
 
the ICA’s judgment that vacated the circuit court’s judgments and
 
December 31, 2008 Order Granting Partial Summary Judgment. The
 case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion. We affirm that portion of the
 ICA’s judgment that affirmed the circuit court’s denial of
 Homeowners’ request for attorneys’ fees.
 
David J. Gierlach and
 
Lance D. Collins
 for petitioners
 
Patrick K. Wong,
Caleb P. Rowe,
Brian T. Moto, and
Jane E. Lovell (Madelyn S.
D’Enbeau on the briefs)
for respondents Mayor Alan
Arakawa, Successor-in-
Interest to Mayor Charmaine
Tavares, William Spence,
Director of Planning, County
of Maui, Successor-in-
Interest to Director Jeff
 Hunt, County of Maui 
Ronald T. Ogomori,
Nathan H. Yoshimoto, and
T.F. Mana Moriarty
for respondents New Sand
Hills, LLC., VP and PK (ML),
LLC., KCOM Corp., and
Sandhills Estates Community
Association
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
-42­