  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 ________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________ ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-18-0000099 10-SEP-2024 09:59 AM Dkt. 53 OPA 
SCWC-18-0000099  
(Consolidated with SCWC-18-0000712)  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
WILMINGTON SAVINGS FUND SOCIETY, FSB, DOING BUSINESS AS  
CHRISTIANA TRUST, NOT IN ITS INDIVIDUAL CAPACITY, BUT SOLELY  
AS TRUSTEE FOR BCAT 2015-14BTT,  
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
ISABELO PACPACO DOMINGO  and  MICHELE ELANOR DOMINGO,  
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellants,  
 
and  
 
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.  and  HALEWILI PLACE COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-18-0000099; CAAP-18-0000712; CASE  NO. 13-1-202K)  
 
SEPTEMBER  10, 2024  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, and EDDINS, JJ., and CIRCUIT JUDGE 
REMIGIO, IN PLACE OF GINOZA, J., RECUSED, AND CIRCUIT JUDGE 
SOUZA, IN PLACE OF DEVENS, J., RECUSED.   
 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.     
   
 This is the second time this  foreclosure  case has come to 
this court  on certiorari. Isabelo Pacpaco Domingo  (“Mr. 
Domingo”)  and his wife, Michele Elanor Domingo  (“Mrs. Domingo”)  
(collectively, “the Domingos”)  Domingos defaulted on a  mortgage 
refinance loan  for  their Kailua-Kona property.   The Domingos  did  
not  file a counterclaim to Wilmington Savings Fund Society, FSB 
(“Wilmington”)’s  foreclosure complaint. The Circuit Court of 
the Third Circuit for the State of Hawaiʻi (“third circuit ”)   
issued a foreclosure judgment and ordered the property to be 
sold at public auction.  
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
     
   
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
I. Introduction 
The Domingos appeal ed the foreclosure judgment. On appeal, 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals ( “ICA”) granted the Domingos’ 
motion to stay the foreclosure judgment conditioned upon the m 
posting a supersedeas bond of $300,000. No supersedeas bond was 
ever posted. 
A judicial foreclosure sale then ensued. At public 
auction, Wilmington placed the highest bid. The third circuit 
confirmed the sale (“confirmation judgment”) . The Domingos then 
appealed the confirmation judgment , which did not as sert any new 
bases for appeal based on the foreclosure sale process . 
Months later , however, the Domingos filed a separate 
complaint for wrongful foreclosure and to quiet title in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit for the State of Hawaiʻi 
2    
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
(“first circuit”). They also filed a  lis pendens in the Land 
Court of  the State of Hawaiʻi (“land court ”).   The land court 
certificate of title issued to Wilmington contained an exception 
for the  first circuit lawsuit.   Wilmington later sold the 
property to BBNY REO  LLC  (“BBNY”)  at a deeply discounted price 
due to the pending lawsuit.   
The ICA granted Wilmington ’s motion to dismiss the 
consolidated appeals from the foreclosure and confirmation 
judgments, deeming the appeal s moot because BBNY had purchased 
the property as a good faith purchaser. 
The Domingos then filed their first application for 
certiorari. We held that whether BBNY was a good faith 
purchaser was a factual issue to be determined by the third 
circuit. 
On remand, t he third circuit deemed BBNY a good faith 
purchaser. The ICA then dismissed the Domingos’ appeals as moot 
because the y had not posted the ordered supersedeas bond . 
The Domingos then filed th is application for writ of 
certiorari . In addressing the questions raised on certiorari 
and additional legal issues raised by these appeals, we hold as 
follows: (1) Even if the mortgagee is the purchaser at a 
judicial foreclosure sale, an appellant of a foreclosure 
judgment must satisfy conditions imposed to obtain a stay 
pending appeal of the foreclosure, including posting a 
3    
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
supersedeas bond, in order to prevent transfer of title from the 
mortgagee-purchaser to a good faith purchaser  and  because the 
Domingos did not post  the  supersedeas bond ordered as a 
condition of stay, Wilmington’s transfer of title was valid, as 
long as it was to a good faith purchaser; (2)  A  purchaser who 
otherwise meets good faith purchaser requirements does not lose that status based on knowledge of a pending wrongful foreclosure 
claim when the  mortgagor fails to post a supersedeas bond 
ordered as a condition of stay  and,  therefore, both BBNY and the 
subsequent purchasers from BBNY were good faith purchasers;  (3) 
A  lis pendens does not eliminate the need to post a supersedeas 
bond ordered as a condition to stay an appeal of a foreclosure 
judgment and the Domingos’  lis pendens does not affect the title 
conveyed to the good faith purchasers; (4) The collateral consequences exception to the mootness doctrine does not apply 
because the Domingos filed their first circuit lawsuit before 
our original opinion in Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 
Hawaiʻi 249, 428 P.3d 761 (2018)  (“Reyes-Toledo II”),  and  their 
first circuit lawsuit is  an improper collateral attack on the 
foreclosure and confirmation judgments; and (5) To the extent 
Reyes-Toledo II  suggested that the compulsory counterclaim rule 
does not apply to wrongful foreclosures counterclaims, it is 
overruled; but (6) If a litigant filed a separate wrongful 
foreclosure lawsuit instead of a counterclaim before entry of a 
4    
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
     
   
  
  
 
   
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
foreclosure judgment after October 9, 2018, when Reyes-Toledo II 
was originally published, up until the date of this opinion, 
that separate lawsuit is not subject to dismissal based on the 
compulsory counterclaim rule. 
Based on the reasoning above, we affirm the ICA’s December 
29, 2023 , published “Order Dismissing Appeal as Moot by Ginoza, 
Chief Judge.” 
II. Background 
A. Factual background 
On February 15, 2007 , Mr. Domingo obtained a $625,500 
mortgage refinance loan from SecurityNational Mortgage Company , 
a Utah corporation. As security for the loan, the Domingos 
granted a mortgage on their property in Kailua -Kona (“the 
property”) . 
B. Foreclosure , sale, and initial appellate proceedings 
On March 13, 2013, Bank of America (“BOA) filed a 
foreclosure complaint in the third circuit. BOA claimed it had 
taken possession of the original note on or before April 17, 
2007 but admitted to losing it sometime before December 2012. 
On November 25, 2016, Wilmington substitute d as plaintiff.1 
On December 1, 2017, Wilmington moved to foreclose . The 
Domingos opposed, arguing Wilmington did not satisfy Hawaiʻi 
The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
5 1    
    
  
 
  
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 490:3-309 (1991)2 requirements for a 
person not in possession of the note . The Domingos also filed 
their own motion for summary judgment on the same basis . 
After a December 27, 201 7 hearing, o n January 29, 2018, the 
third circuit granted Wilmington ’s motion and filed orders for 
an interlocutory decree of foreclosure , appointing a 
commissioner , and for the property be sold at public auction , as 
well as a judgment (collectively “foreclosure judgment”) .3 On 
February 20, 2018, the Domingos filed a notice of appeal from 
the foreclosure judgment .4 
2 HRS § 490:3 -309 provides in part: 
(a) A person not in possession of an instrument is entitled 
to enforce the instrument if (i) the person was in rightful 
possession of the instrument and entitled to enforce it 
when loss of possession occurred, (ii) the loss of 
possession was not the result of a transfer by the person 
or a lawful seizure, and (iii) the person cannot reasonably 
obtain possession of the instrument because the instrument 
was destroyed, its whereabouts cannot be determined, or it 
is in the wrongful possession of an unknown person or a 
person that cannot be found or is not amenable to service 
of process. 
3 The third circuit court ruled t hat Wilmington was able to enforce the 
lost note pursuant to HRS § 490:3 -309 because BOA was entitled to enforce the 
indorsed -in-blank note as evidence d by the lost note affidavit and the 
declaration of BOA and that Wilmington, as the holder of the original lost 
note affidavit is entitled to enforce the note. The third circuit also noted 
that the lost note affidavit included an indemnification agreement fro m BOA, 
in favor of the Domingos ; thus, the Domingos were adequately protected 
against any loss that might occur should any other party seek to enforce the 
note. 
4 This appeal was filed under case number CAAP -18-0000099. 
6    
    
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   5 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
On April 16, 2018, the Domingos filed a motion in the ICA 
for a stay pending appeal; Wilmington opposed.   On May 11, 2018, 
the ICA issued an order conditioning  a stay of the foreclosure 
on the posting of a $300,000 supersedeas bond.  5
The ICA’s order states in part: 
 [I]t appears that [the Domingos] seek to stay, 
pending appeal further enforcement of the [third circuit]’s 
January 29, 2018 Judgment in favor of [Wilming ton].  
 Upon review of the record, including evidence of the 
Property’s tax -assessed value, the asserted positions of 
the parties, and other factors and circumstances in the 
case, it appears that a supersedes bond in the amount of 
$300,000  would adequately secure [Wilmington’s] interest 
pending appeal.  
 Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Motion for 
Stay is granted in part. A stay of further enforcement of 
the Judgment is granted on the condition that Appellants 
submit to this court for its approval a supersedeas bond in 
an amount of [$300,000]. The stay will take effect upon the approval of the supersedeas bond by this court.  
(Emphasis added. ) No bond was ever posted. 
 On May 29, 2018, the court-appointed commissioner held an 
auction. Wilmington  placed a credit bid of $892,500  and 
acquired title.   On August 15, 2018, the third circuit confirmed 
On March 18, 2018, the Domingos filed a motion in the third 
circuit to set supersedeas bond for a stay pending appeal, which the 
third circuit denied. The Domingos therefore filed this motion in the 
ICA pursuant to Rule 8 of the Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(“HRAP”) , which provides in relevant part : 
(a) Motions for stay, supersedeas bond or injunction in the 
appellate courts. A motion for stay of the judgment or 
order in a civil appeal, or for approval of a supersedeas 
bond . . . , shall ordinarily be made in the first instance 
to the court or agency appealed from. . . . 
(b) Stay may be conditioned upon giving of bond; 
proceedings against sureties. Relief available in the 
appellate courts under this rule may be conditioned upon 
the filing of a bond or other appropriate security in the 
court or agency appealed from. . . . 
HRAP Rule 8 (2010). 
7    
   
 
    
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
     
 
   
   
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
the sale of the property to Wilmington, entered judgment, and 
ordered issuance of a writ of possession (“confirmation 
judgment”) . 
On September 14, 2018, the Domingos filed a notice of 
appeal from the confirmation judgment .6 This appeal did not 
raise any additional appellate issues. 
On October 1, 2018, the Domingos filed a separate complaint 
in the first circuit against Wilmington , alleging wrongful 
foreclosure and seeking damages and to quiet title (“first 
circuit lawsuit”).7 That day, they also filed a notice of 
pendency of action (“ lis pendens ”) and recorded it in the land 
court. 
On January 25, 2019, the ICA consolidat ed the Domingos ’ 
appeals from the foreclosure and confirmation judgment s.8 
On December 14, 2021, the land court issued Land Court 
Certificate of Title No. 1,162,650 identifying Wilmington as the 
owner of the property (“certificate of title”) . The certificate 
of title subjected Wilmington’s title to listed encumbrances 
that included the Domingos’ lis penden s. 
6 Case number CAAP -18-0000712. 
7 Case number 1CC181001561. 
8 The ICA ordered that all briefing be filed in CAAP-18-0000099, the 
foreclosure judgment appeal. 
8    
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
After marketing the property for more than a year, on 
January 4, 2022, Wilmington sold it to BBNY, a Florida limited 
liability company , for $400,000 . The Domingos’ pending appeals 
and the first circuit lawsuit had a significant negative impact 
on the sale price. 
On September 6, 2022, BBNY further conveyed the property to 
two individuals (“subsequent purchasers”). The deeds and 
pending certificates of title to BBNY and the subsequent 
purchasers d o not appear to have included the Domingos’ first 
circuit lis pendens as an encumbrance. 
In their opening brief in the consolidated appeals , the 
Domingos asserted that b ecause Wilmington was never in 
possession of the original promissory note , foreclosure was 
improperly granted under HRS § 490:3-309. Wilmington responded 
in its answering brief that it was entitled to foreclose b ased 
on its compliance with HRS § 490:3-309’s process to fo reclose on 
a lost note as well as based on equitable doctrines. 
On April 1, 2022, Wilmington filed a motion to dismiss the 
consolidated appeals, arguing they were moot because the 
Domingos failed to post the supersedeas bond and the property 
had been sold to a good faith purchaser , BBNY. Wilmington 
asserted that an appellant challenging a foreclosure must post a 
supersedeas bond or otherwise obtain a stay and that an 
appellant who failed to obtain a stay by posting a bond cannot 
9    
  
  
      
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
attack a good faith purchaser’s title to property purchased at a 
judicial sale and confirmed by court order . Wilmington cited 
Bank of N.Y. Mellon v. R. Onaga, Inc. , in which adopted the 
general rule stated by the ICA in City Bank v. Saje Ventures II, 
7 Haw. App. 130, 133, 748 P.2d 812, 814 (198 8): 
The general rule is that the right of a good faith 
purchaser to receiv e  property acquired at a judicial sale 
cannot be affected by the reversal of an order ratifying the sale where a supersedeas bond has not been filed. Id.  
(quoting  Leisure Campground & Country Club Ltd. P ’ship v.  
Leisure Estates, 280 Md. 220, 372 A.2d 595,598 (1977)). The ICA explained that the purpose of the rule is to advance 
the stability and productiveness of judicial sales.  Id.  
(quoting Am. Jur. 2d Judicial Sales  § 55 (1969)). It noted 
that the exceptions to this rule are when the reversal is 
based on jurisdictional grounds or when the purchaser is 
the mortgagee, explaining that the mortgagee in that case 
does not free himself from the underlying dispute to which 
he is a party. See  id.  (quoting  Leisure Campground, 372 
A.2d at 598.   
 
Onaga, 140 Hawaiʻi 358, 366, 400 P.3d 559, 56 7 (2017)(partially 
cleaned up) . 
In their April 6, 2022, opposition to the motion to 
dismiss, the Domingos argued that the case had to be remanded to 
the third circuit for an evidentiary hearing to determ ine 
whether BBNY was a good faith purchaser. The Domingos also 
contended the ICA’s review must be based on solely on the record 
and that the sale to BBNY was not in the record. 
On August 26, 2022, the ICA issued an amended summary 
disposition order determining BBNY to be a third-party good 
faith purchaser and dismiss ed the consolidated appeals as moot. 
10    
  On October 7, 2022, the Domingos filed their first 
application for writ of certiorari, which we accepted.   On 
February 15, 2023, we issued a memorandum opinion  ruling that 
the ICA improperly relied on new evidence submitted with 
Wilmington’s motion to dismiss to deem BBNY a good faith  
purchaser, which was a disputed factual issue. We vacated the ICA’s order with instructions to temporarily remand the case to 
the third circuit for an evidentiary hearing  on the issue. On 
February 24, 2023, the ICA entered an order for temporary remand 
to the third circuit.  
  
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
C. Third circuit proceedings on remand 
 On April 11, 2023, the third circuit  held an evidentiary 
hearing and, a day later, entered its findings of fact and 
conclusions of law (“ FOFs/COLs”).   As summarized by the ICA, the 
third circuit ruled as follows:  9
The Circuit Court found, inter alia , that BBNY purchased 
the subject property from Wilmington for a fair price under 
the circumstances; BBNY is not related or connected to 
Wilmington or its loan servicer Selene Finance, LP in any 
way; the sale of the subject property was completed after 
negotiations with other interested parties failed; the sale 
of the property from Wilmington to BBNY was negotiated in 
good-faith and at arms -length; a Special Warranty Deed and 
Corrective Special Warranty Deed was recorded in the Land 
Court conveying the property to BBNY; and in purchasing the 
property, BBNY noted that the Domingos did not obtain a 
stay of proceedings and did not post any bond in connection 
with this consolidated appeal. The Circuit Court also found 
that the Domingos filed an action on October 1, 2018, in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Civil No. 18 -1-
1561) asserting claims against Wilmington for damages for 
wrongful foreclosure and to quiet title. A Notice of 
Pendency of Action ( lis pendens ) relating to the civil case 
The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. 
11 9    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
was recorded in the Land Court and Wilmington ’s Certificate 
of Title to the subject property lists the lis pendens as 
an encumbrance. The Circuit Court determined, inter alia , 
that without a supersedeas bond, BBNY's knowledge of the 
Domingos ’ claims against Wilmington, including the pending 
consolidated appeal and lis pendens , did not prohibit 
Wilmington from selling the property to BBNY; and BBNY was 
a good-faith third -party purchaser of the subject property. 
The Circuit Court also found that after purchas ing the 
property from Wilmington, BBNY took possession of the 
property, marketed the property for sale, and sold it to 
another third party purchaser; the sale of the property 
from BBNY to the subsequent purchasers was also negotiated 
in good-faith and at arms -length; and a Special Warranty 
Deed was executed and recorded in the Land Court. The 
Circuit Court determined the subject property is currently 
owned by the subsequent purchasers who are also third -
party, good -faith purchasers of the property. 
D. Further ICA proceedings 
 On December 29, 2023, the ICA published its “Order 
Dismissing Appeal as Moot by Ginoza, Chief Judge.” This order  
dismissed  the consolidated appeals  as moot.  The ICA rejected 
the Domingos’ argument that their failure to post a supersedeas 
bond was of no consequence to the justiciability of their 
consolidated appeals. The ICA also declined to apply the 
mortgagee exception to the City Bank  rule  (for when the 
purchaser is the mortgagee)  because Wilmington purchased the 
property at the commissioner’s sale and sold it to BBNY , which 
was good faith purchaser. The ICA  ruled there was no “infirmity 
in the title” when BBNY p urchased the property.  
The ICA also rejected the Domingos ’s  argument  that the lis 
pendens was an alternative to posting a supersedeas bond and  
obtaining a stay of the foreclosure judgment.  The ICA ruled the 
Domingos waived their lis pendens argument because it was not 
12    
   
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
raised in their opposition to Wilmington’s motion to dismiss and 
was only raised in their motion for reconsideration. Addressing 
the merits in any event , the ICA noted this court ’s cases 
expressing concerns regarding potential abuse of the lis pendens 
doctrine and indicating that a lis pendens does not serve the 
same function as a stay . 
The ICA then discussed a Maryland appellate opinion,  
Creative Development  Corp. v. Bond, 367 A.2d 566  (Md. Ct. Spec. 
App. 1976),  discussed in Section IV.A.2 below, which  deemed  the  
lis pendens  doctrine  inapplicable because  the  debtor  sought to 
have it “both ways” with a n appeal tying up sale of the 
property, while simultaneously not incurring the expense of 
posting a bond.   Creative Dev., 367 A.2d at 569-70.  The 
Maryland court ruled this to be  an improper collateral attack  on 
the foreclosure judgment.   Id.    10 
The ICA therefore determined the lis pendens did not 
prevent BBNY from purchasing the property from Wilmington in 
good faith . The ICA pointed out that the Domingos had not 
argued applicability of any exception to the mootness doctrine 
and also determined that, in any event, no exception applied. 
The ICA applied the reasoning of Creative Development in 
ordering the appeals dismissed. 
The Maryland Court of Special Appeals is now the Appellate Court of 
Maryland. See infra n. 13. 
13 10    
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
E. Certiorari proceedings 
The Domingos ’ three question s on certiorari are restated as 
follows: 
1. Did the ICA err, contrary to its own decision in City 
Bank and this Court’s decision in Onaga, when it determined 
that because the Domingos did not post a supersedeas bond, 
a post-foreclosure private sale of foreclosed property by 
the mortgagee to a non -party buyer rendered these 
consolidated appeals moot? 
2. Did the ICA commit err, contrary to the lis pendens 
doctrine as codified in HRS § 501-151 for land court 
property when it affirmed the third circuit’s conclusion 
that non -party buyers of the property from Wilmington 
during the pendency of these appeals were not charged with 
knowledge of an infirmity of title, even though a separate 
wrongful foreclosure and quiet title lawsuit was and 
remains pending in the first circuit and even though the 
Domingos had previously recorded a lis pendens which 
appeared as an encumbrance upon Wilmington’s l and court 
certificate of title? 
3. Did the ICA err contrary to th is Court’s opinions in 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes -Toledo, 143 Hawaii 249, 428 P.3d 
761 (2018), when it dismissed these consolidate appeals 
based on mootness even though a separate lawsuit remains 
pending in which the Domingos seek damages for Wilmington’s 
wrongful foreclosure, making the “collateral consequences” 
exception to the mootness doctrine appli cable? 
III. Standards of Review 
A. Mootness 
Under Hawaiʻi law, mootness is a prudential concern of 
judicial self-governance founded in concern about the proper –  
and properly limited –  role of courts in a democratic society. 
State v. Hewitt, 153 Hawai ʻi 33, 41, 526 P.3d 558, 566 
(2023)(cleaned up). The  mootness doctrine is properly invoked 
where events have so affected the relations between the parties 
that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal  –  
14    
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
adverse interest and effective remedy — have been compromised. 
Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. Of Water Supply , 99 Hawaiʻi 191, 
195-96, 53 P.3d 799, 80 3-04 (2002) ( cleaned up). 
B. Circuit court’s conclusions of law 
A COL [conclusion of law] is not binding upon an 
appellate court and is freely reviewable for its 
correctness. [The appellate court] ordinarily reviews 
COLs under the right/wrong standard. Thus, a COL that 
is supported by the trial court ’s FOFs [findings of 
fact] and that reflects an application of the correct 
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL 
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is 
reviewed under the clearly erro neous standard because 
the court ’s conclusions are dependent upon the facts 
and circumstances of each individual case. 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees ’  Ret. Sys. of the State of 
Hawaiʻi, 106 Hawai ʻi  416,  430, 106 P.3d  339,  353 (2005)(cleaned 
up).  
IV. Discussion 
A. The Domingos’ questions on certiorari lack merit 
1. Because the property was conveyed to a good faith 
purchaser, failure to post the supersedeas bond 
rendered these appeals, which only raised title 
issues, moot 
The Domingos’ first question on certiorari asks 
whether the ICA erred when in determined their appeals moot 
based on the Domingo’s failure to post a  supersedeas bond 
and the sale of the property to a good faith purchaser. For 
the reasons below, we answer this question “no.”   
15    
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
a. Failure to satisfy conditions for a stay pending 
appeal of a foreclosure judgment, including 
failure to post a supersedeas bond, renders title 
issues moot when the property is sold by a 
mortgagee purchaser t o a good faith purch aser 
The ICA’s May 11, 2018, order expressly conditioned a stay 
of the foreclosure judgment pending appeal on the filing of a 
$300,000 supersedeas bond. The Domingos argue their failure to 
post this bond is inconsequential because Wilmington, as the 
mortgagee, was the purchaser. The y ground this argument on the 
“mortgagee exception” of the general rule we adopted in Onaga. 
To reiterate, the general rule is that the right of a good 
faith purchaser to receive property acquired at a judicial sale 
cannot b e affected by the reversal of an order ratifying the 
sale where a supersedeas bond has not been filed. Onaga, 140 
Hawaiʻi at 366, 400 P.3d at 547. An exception to this general 
rule, however, is when the purchaser is the mortgagee, because 
the mortgagee does not free itself from the underlying dispute 
to which it is a party. Id. 
In other words, if a mortgagee -purchaser at the judicial 
sale retains title pending the appeal of a foreclosure judgment 
which is vacated or reversed on appeal, both the foreclosure and 
confirmation judgment s can be set aside, even if a supersedeas 
bond ordered as a condition of stay has not been filed. In 
contrast, if a supersedeas bond ordered as a condition to stay 
the foreclosure judgment is not posted and the mortgagee -
16    
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
purchaser sells the property to a good faith purchaser, a 
vacatur or reversal of a foreclosure judgment cannot affect 
title co nveyed to the good faith purchaser. 
Onaga  is on point. It arose from foreclosure proceedings 
between mortgagors and mortgagees R. Onaga Inc. and the Bank of 
New York Mellon (“BONY”). 140 Hawaiʻi at 360, 400 P.3d at 560. 
The first circuit determined BONY had a first priority lien and 
granted BONY’s motion approving the sale of the property to 
third parties. Onaga, 140 Hawaiʻ i at 362, 400 P.3d at 563. 
Onaga challenged the court’s order but did not post  a 
supersedeas bond. Id.   We held that an appellant  challenging a 
foreclosure must post a supersedeas bond or otherwise obtain a 
stay and that an appellant who has failed to obtain a stay by 
posting a bond may not attack a good faith purchaser’s title to 
property purchased at a judicial sale and confirmed by court 
order. Onaga, 140 Hawai ʻi at 367, 400 P.3d at 568.  
The ICA’s decision in City Bank, on which the Onaga  general 
rule is based, is also on point.   In City Bank, the mortgagee 
successfully sought a foreclosure judgment against Saje Ventures 
II. 7 Haw. App. at 132, 748 P.2d at 814. The property in 
dispute was then sold at public auction to a third party, 
Outrigger Hotel Hawai ʻi, and confirmed by the circuit court.   Id.   
Saje Ventures II appealed. Id.   The ICA determined that because 
a third party purchased the property at the foreclosure sale and 
17    
  
 
  
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
there was nothing in the record to indicate that Outrigger was 
not a good faith purchaser, there could be no stay of execution 
of the confirmation of sale. City Bank , 7 Haw. App. at 133, 748 
P.2d at 815. 
When the ICA discussed the general rule, it explicitly 
relied on a Maryland case, Leisure Campground and Country Club 
Ltd. Partnership v. Leisure Estates, 372 A.2d 595, 598 (Md. 
1977). Leisure Campground  is an opinion of the Court of Appeals 
of Maryland.   That opinion further analyzed the purchaser-
mortgagee exception later discussed in City Bank  and Onaga. The 
Maryland apex court noted that the policy underlying the general 
rule “is to encourage nonparty individuals to bid at foreclosure 
sales.” 372 A.2d at 598. The rationale for the purchaser -
mortgagee exception is that because the mortgagee has the land in its hands after purchase, “there is no reason why [the 
mortgagee] should not be bound by a decision of the court 
requiring delivery of the property.” Id.   In Leisure 
Campground, because the mortgagee purchased the property at the 
foreclosure sale, “and the intervening rights of innocent 
nonparty purchasers [were] therefore not involved ,” a 11
The Court of Appeals of Maryland is now the Supreme Court of Maryland; 
it was and remains the court of last resort of the Maryland state judiciary. 
The name of the Maryland Court of Special Appeals was simultaneously changed 
to the Appellate Court of Mar yland. 
https://www.courts.state.md.us/media/news/2022/pr20221214 
[https://perma.cc/WZ9G -D8HP]. 
18 11    
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
supersedeas bond was not required to avoid mootness. Id.  
(emphasis added). Thus, Leisure Campground  also ruled  that  even 
if the mortgagee is the foreclosure sale  purchaser, if the 
mortgagor  fails to post a supersedeas bond ordered as a 
condition of stay, rights of “innocent nonparty purchasers” 
cannot be affected.  
Therefore, although this holding is implicit in our 
precedent, we now explicitly hold that even if the mortgagee is 
the purchaser at a judicial foreclosure sale, an appellant of a 
foreclosure judgment must satisfy conditions imposed to obtain a 
stay pending appeal of the foreclosure, including posting a 
supersedeas bond, in order to prevent transfer of title from the 
mortgagee purchaser to a good faith purchaser. Thus, without 
the posting of a supersedeas bond ordered as a condition of 
stay, Wilmingto n’s transfer of title was valid, as long as it 
was to a good faith purchaser . 
As argued by Wilmington , adoption of the Domingos’ 
position , that they could continue to seek return of title based 
on an alleged wrongful foreclosure without posting the 
supersedeas bond , would have profound consequences on Hawai ʻi 
foreclosures . Foreclosing mortgagees would be dissuaded from 
bidding at foreclosure auctions as they would face the risk of 
having to hold properties pending determination of appeals while 
paying added interest, taxes, insurance, association dues and 
19    
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
other expenses . Mortgag ors would also be incentivized to appeal 
irrespective of merit without incurring the cost of posting a 
bond. Costs would increase and delays in obtaining final 
judgment would harm junior creditors and increase demands on our 
courts. Secondary consequences could also include greater 
restrictions on new mortgage loans in Hawai ʻi and decreased 
availability of home equity loans. 
b. BBNY was a good faith purchaser 
For these reasons, Wilmingto n’s transfer of title was 
valid, as long as it was to a good faith purchaser . The ICA 
affirmed the third circuit’s decision on remand tha t BBNY was a 
good faith purchaser. 
Our appellate courts have adopted the “ good faith 
purchaser ” standard for a purchaser of property acquired in a 
judicial sale. See Onaga, 140 Hawaiʻi at 360, 400 P.3d at 560 
(using the language “the right of a good fai th purchaser to 
receive property acquired at a judicial sale . . .”) (emphasis 
added). “An innocent or good faith purchaser is one who, by an 
honest contract or agreement, purchases property or acquires an 
interest therein, without knowledge, or means of knowledge 
sufficient to charge him in law with knowledge, of any infirmity 
20    
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
in the title of the seller. ” Onaga, 140 Hawai ʻi at 367 n.13, 400 
P.3d at 568 n.13 .12 
The Domingos argue that BBNY was not a good faith purchaser 
because it purchased the property with actual knowledge of the 
Domingos’ pending civil suit and the lis pendens, and at a 
substantially discounted price due to the on -going litigation. 
There is no dispute that BBNY took the property with 
constructive, if not actual, knowledge of the Domingos’ separate 
lawsuit and lis pendens . The certificate of title to Wilmington 
had a specific exclusion for the Domingos’ first circuit 
mortgage foreclosure lawsuit. 
We agree with the third circuit and ICA, however, that BBNY 
was a good faith purchaser despite knowledge of the Domingos’ 
first circuit wrongful foreclosure lawsuit and lis pendens.  We 
now adopt the ICA’s posi tion in its summary disposition order in 
In re Marn Family Litigation, 143 Hawaiʻi  236, *4, 426 P.3d 460, 
*4 (App. Dec. 11, 2015):  
(“[V]irtually every purchaser of a property in a judicial 
sale has notice of the pending litigation which, if we 
adopted [the  mortgagor’s]  argument, would leave virtually 
every judicial sale unsettled, even absent a stay pending 
appeal. This result would be completely contrary to the 
policy of advancing the stability and productiveness of 
21 12   Since the ICA’s 1988 opinion in  City Bank, Hawaiʻ i appellate  decisions  
have  consistently applied the “good faith purchaser” standard for purchasers 
at judicial  sales.   Cases involving non- judicial  foreclosure sales have 
referenced other standards, such as “bona fide purchaser” and “innocent 
purchaser for value.” See, e.g., Delapinia v. Nationstar Mortgage LLC, 150 
Hawaiʻi 91, 94- 95, 497 P.3d 106, 109 -10 (2021).     
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
   ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
judicial sales.”) (footnote omitted); see also 47 Am. Jur. 
2 Judicial Sales § 23 (2006) (“The fact that a purchaser at 
a judicial sale has notice merely of a contemplated appeal 
from the decree directing the sale does not deprive such 
purchaser of the status of a purchaser in good faith.”) 
(footnote omitted).  
Here, BBNY had actual or constructive knowledge of the 
Domingos’ first circuit wrongful foreclosure lawsuit. But 
despite what could be construed as suggestions in some Hawaiʻi 
precedent that a purchaser’s knowledge of a pending wrongful 
foreclosure claim precludes good faith purchaser status, we hold 
that when a mortgagor fails to post a supersedeas bond ordered 
as a condition of stay, a purchaser who otherwise meets good faith purchaser requirements does not lose good faith purchaser 
status.  In this case, we agree with the third circuit and ICA’s 
analysis that both BBNY and the subsequent purchasers from BBNY 
qualified as good faith purchasers.  
2. The lis pendens did not create an infirmity on title 
based on the Domingos’ first circuit lawsuit because 
the Domingos failed to post the supersedeas bond 
ordered as a condition of stay 
The Domingos’s second question on certiorari asks: 
2. Did the ICA commit err, contrary to the lis pendens 
doctrine as codified in HRS § 501-15113 for land court 
HRS § 501-151 (2012) provides as follows: 
§ 501-151 Pending actions, judgments; recording of notice. 
No writ of entry, action for partition, or any action 
affecting the title to real property or the use and 
occupancy thereof or the buildings thereon, and no 
judgment, nor any appeal or other proceeding to vacate or 
reverse any judgment, shall have any effect upon registered 
land as against persons other than the parties thereto, 
unless a full memorandum thereof, containing also a 
(continued . . .) 
22 13    
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
property when it affirmed the third circuit’s conclusion 
that non -party buyers of the property from Wilmington 
during the pendency of these appeals were not charged with 
knowledge of an infirmity of title, even though a separate 
wrongful foreclosure and quiet title lawsuit was and 
remains pending in the first circuit and even though the 
Domingos had previously recorded a lis pendens which 
appeared as an encumbrance upon Wilmington’s l and court 
certificate of title? 
We also answer this question,  “no.”   Like the ICA, we find 
the Maryland appellate court opinion in Creative Dev.  
instructive.  
In Creative Dev.,  the trustee, Calhoun Bond, Esq. (“Bond”), 
initiated a foreclosure proceeding on behalf of lender Chase 
Manhattan Mortgage and Realty Trust (“Chase”) against mortgagor, 
Creative Development Corporation (“Creative”). 367 A.2d at 567. 
The Maryland circuit court found that Creative had defaulted on the loan and that Bond could sell the property. Id.   On appeal 
to the Maryland  appellate court, Creative filed a motion to stay 
pending appeal, which was  denied. Id.  at 568. The property was 
eventually sold to Chase at public auction, who then sold the property to third parties. Id.   Thereafter, Creative, unable to 
post a supersedeas bond to stay the sale  to third persons, 
sought to accomplish the same purpose by filing another suit. 
Id.   Creative argued that because the suit placed third-party 
(. . .continued) 
reference to the number of the certificate of title of the 
land affected is filed or recorded and registered. 
23    
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
purchasers on notice, the lis pendens doctrine thus applied. 
Id. 
The Maryland appellate court disagreed. The court stated: 
Patently, Creative seeks to invoke lis pendens as a 
form of supersedeas without incurring the expense of a 
bond. It is much cheaper to file a lawsuit than to 
post a supersedeas bond . . . but the suit will not 
take the place of the bond. If courts were to sanction 
this practice . . . we would cast a tremendous 
financial burden upon lenders who would be placed in 
the position of having won their case and lost it at 
the same time. . . . It was never contemplated, at 
least in this State, that lis pendens could  be invoked 
as a result of a collateral attack upon an ostensibly proper judgment, entered after a full hearing, in 
order to defeat the effect of the judgment and 
simultaneously avoid the cost of a supersedeas bond . 
. . Creative seeks to have it both ways: a viable 
appeal which ties up the property of Chase, while, at 
the same time, not going to the expense of posting a 
bond. It thus, wants to gamble, as it were, with 
someone else’s money. We recognize that which Creative 
labels lis pendens as an imposter, masquerading as an 
accepted equitable principle when, in law, equity, and 
fact, it is not. Lis pendens does not apply to this 
case. 
  
Creative Dev. , 367 A.2d at 568 -570. 
24  Also, as noted by the ICA in its published dismissal order, 
in Lathrop, 111 Hawaiʻi at 313-14, 141 P.3d at 486-87, we cited 
to In re Onouli–Kona Land Co., 846 F.2d 1170 (9th Cir. 1988).  
In In re Onouli-Kona Land Co.,  mortgagee  Estate of Richards, et 
al. (“Estate of Richards”), sought to foreclosure on a mortgage 
against mortgagor Onouli-Kona Land Co. (“Onouli”). 846 F.2d at  
1171. Onouli filed a petition for bankruptcy in 1984 and the 
Estate of Richards purchased the property at a bankruptcy court 
auction. Id.   Onouli appealed the bankruptcy court’s order but     
    
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
failed to obtain a stay pending appeal. Id. Rather, it filed a 
notice of lis pendens. Id. The Ninth Circuit ruled that 
because the Estate of Richards purchased the property in good 
faith, Onouli’s lis pendens d id not substitute for failure to 
obtain a stay, and the appeal was moot. Id. at 1175. 
Although this holding is also implicit in our precedent, we 
explicitly hold that a lis pendens does not eliminate the need 
to post a supersedeas bond ordered as a condition to stay an 
appeal of a foreclosure judgment and that a lis pendens does not 
affect the title conveyed to a good faith purchaser. 
3. The collateral consequences exception to the mootness 
doctrine does not apply because the Domingos’ first 
circuit lawsuit was an improper collateral attack on 
the foreclosure judgment 
In their third question on certiorari, t he Domingos ask: 
Did the ICA err contrary to th is Court’s opinions in Bank 
of Am., N.A. v. Reyes -Toledo, 143 Hawaii 249, 428 P.3d 761 
(2018), when it dismissed these consolidate appeals based 
on mootness even though a separate lawsuit remains pending 
in which the Domingos seek damages for Wilmington’s 
wrongful foreclosure, making the “collateral consequences” 
exception to the mootness doctrine appli cable? 
As noted by the ICA, the Domingos did not argue any 
exception to the mootness doctrine before the ICA. Therefore, 
the argument is waived. But even on the merits, the Domingos’ 
argument fails.  
The mootness doctrine 
encompass[es] the circumstances that destroy the 
justiciability of a suit previously suitable for 
determination. Put another way, the suit must remain 
alive throughout the course of litigation to the 
25    
  
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
moment of final appellate disposition. Its chief 
purpose is to assure that the adversary system, once 
set in operation, remains properly fueled. The 
doctrine seems appropriate where events subsequent to 
the judgment of the trial court have so affected the 
relations between the parties that the two conditions 
for justiciability relevant on appeal —adverse 
interest and effective remedy —have been compromised. 
Lathrop, 111 Hawaiʻi at 312-13, 141 P.3d at 485-86. A case is 
moot if the reviewing court can no longer grant effective 
relief. In re Marn Fam., 141 Hawaiʻ i 1, 7, 403 P.3d 621, 627 
(2016).  
We have recognized three exceptions to the mootness 
doctrine: 
 (1) the “capable of repetition, yet evading review” 
exception; (2) the public interest exception; and (3) the 
“collateral consequences” exception. Hamilton ex rel Lethem v. 
Lethem, 119 Hawaiʻi 1, 5, 193 P.3d 839, 843 (2008).  To 
successfully invoke the collateral consequences doctrine,  
the litigant must show that there is a reasonable 
possibility that prejudicial collateral consequences 
will occur. Accordingly, the litigant must establish 
these consequences by more than mere conjecture, but 
need not demonstrate that these consequences are more 
probable than not. This standard provides the 
necessary limitations on justiciability underlying the 
mootness doctrine itself. 
Lethem, 119 Hawaiʻi at 8, 193 P.3d at 846 (concluding that the 
reputational harm to a father’s appeal of an expired temporary restraining order based on allegations of abuse of his daughter, 
fell within the collateral consequences exception to the 
mootness doctrine) (cleaned up).  
26    
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
    ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
The Domingos argue the collateral consequences exception 
applies based on the ICA’s decision in Bank of New York Mellon 
v. DeShaw , Nos. CAAP -19-0000865, CAAP -22-0000408, 2023 WL 
8254510, *7 (Haw. App. Nov. 29, 2023) (mem. op.). In DeShaw, 
mortgagee BONY filed a foreclosure complaint against mortgagors 
Dennis Duane DeShaw and Susan Kay Broer -DeShaw (“the DeShaws”). 
Id., at *1 -3. In response, the DeShaws filed an answer and 
counterclaim, including claims for wrongful foreclosure and to 
quiet title. Id. at *2. 
The first circuit ultimately granted BONY’s motion for 
summary judgment and issued a foreclosure decree and judgment. 
Id. at *3. The DeShaws appealed. Id. On appeal, BONY argued 
that because the property had already “sold to a bona fide 
purchaser” and the DeShaws did not p ost a supersedeas bond, the 
appeal was moot. Id. at *5. Based on the “collateral 
consequences” exception, t he ICA did not completely dismiss the 
appeal because of the possible prejudicial effect of a dismissal 
to the extent the count erclaim sought damages for wrongful 
foreclosure . Id. at *7. The mortgagor basically conceded only 
damages claims remained , arguing “[e]ven if title cannot be 
recovered, under the counterclaim the issue of damages 
remains[,]” and that the foreclosure appeal was “not moot 
because effective relief can be afforded in the form of 
damages.” Id. at *5. 
27    
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
The Domingos may have had a basis for arguing applicability 
of the colla teral consequences exception as to a wrongful 
foreclosure damages claim if they had filed a counterclaim , like 
the DeShaws. However, t hey instead filed a separate wrongful 
foreclosure and quiet title lawsuit . Based on th e reasoning in 
Section IV.A.1 above, their quiet title claim in th e first 
circuit lawsuit is in any event also moot. But their damages 
claim for wrongful foreclosure is also moot because th e first 
circuit lawsuit is an improper collateral attack on the 
foreclosure judgment , as explained by the Maryland appellate 
court in Creative Dev. ; therefore, the collat eral consequences 
exception does not apply. 
The Domingos’ assertion that their separate lawsuit remains 
viable due to Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes -Toledo, 143 Hawaiʻi 249, 
428 P.3d 761 (2018) (“Reyes-Toledo II”), is also without merit. 
We hold in Section IV.C below that separate lawsuits filed from 
October 9, 2018 to the date of this opinion , assuming they were 
filed before foreclosure judgments, are not to be dismissed due 
to language in that opinion suggesting that wrongful foreclosure 
claims are not compulsory counterclaims. But as also explained 
in Section IV.C, our precedent before Reyes-Toledo II clearly 
held that known claims for wrongful foreclosure are compulsory 
counterclaims. And the Domingos filed their separate first 
circuit lawsuit on October 1, 2018, eight days before our 
28    
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
original opinion in Reyes-Toledo II . In it, they asserted 
claims based on facts they had already unsuc cessfully raised to 
defend against Wilmington’s foreclosure judgment . Because the 
Domingos filed their first circuit lawsuit before our original 
opinion in Reyes-Toledo II , they cannot argue they filed the 
separate lawsuit in reliance on that opinion. Hence, t heir 
first circuit lawsuit was and remains an improper collateral 
attack on the foreclosure and confirmation judgments and there 
is no reasonable possibility that prejudicial collateral 
consequences will occur based on this ruling. Therefore, the 
Domingos’ appeals are moot. 
C. To the extent Reyes-Toledo II suggested that the compulsory 
counterclaim rule does not apply to wrongful foreclosures 
counterclaims, it is overruled 
Although the Domingos cannot claim reliance on our opinion 
in Reyes-Toledo II, we recognize we may have created confusion 
regarding applicability of the compulsory counterclaim rule in 
the following passage from that opinion: 
[A]  mortgagor need not wait for a foreclosure decree to 
assert a wrongful foreclosure claim. If a party with no 
authority or standing files a foreclosure action, no 
foreclosure decree would result, yet the mortgagor would 
have spent time and incurred expenses to defend against 
such a lawsuit. Allowing a mortgagor to bring a wrongful 
foreclosure counterclaim without awaiting an actual 
foreclosure benefits judicial economy and efficiency, as a 
foreclosure defendant should not have to institute a 
separate legal action after the pending foreclosure case is 
decided. Accordingly, a mortgagor should be able to assert 
a counterclaim for wrongful foreclosure based on the underlying facts of the pending foreclosure case. However, 
we emphasize this does not mean a mortgagor must assert the 
wrongful foreclosure claim as a compulsory counterclaim.  
29    
    
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Reyes-Toledo II, 143 Hawaiʻi at 264, 428 P.3d at 776 (emphasis 
added). 
 We recognize that this language, read without considering 
the context, unfortunately suggests that wrongful foreclosure 
claims are not compulsory counterclaims. Contextually, however, 
Reyes-Toledo II  arose after we previously held that a lender  
claiming standing to foreclose based on possession of a note 
must establish it had possession at the time it filed  the 
foreclosure lawsuit. See  Bank  of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 
139 Hawaiʻi 361, 369-70, 390 P.3d 1248, 1256-57 (2017)  (“Reyes-
Toledo I”).  The homeowner there had actually filed a wrongful 
foreclosure  counterclaim  in response to the foreclosure 
complaint. Reyes-Toledo I,  139  Hawaiʻi at 364, 390  P.3d at 1251.   
The ICA, however,  agreed with the lender  that a wrongful 
foreclosure claim could not be filed until after a foreclosure 
judgment had entered. Reyes-Toledo II, 143 Hawaiʻ i at 255, 428 
P.3d at 767.  
It was in the context of reversing that holding that our 
opinion included the passage above. In othe r words, because we 
had not previously ruled that , in order to foreclose, a lender 
must establish possession of the note at the time it filed its 
foreclosure complaint, we did not want to preclude any such 
wrongful foreclosure claims that may have been filed in separate 
30    
  
 
  
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
lawsuits. But, after Reyes-Toledo I , this basis for asserting 
wrongful foreclosure was know n. 
In this regard, HRCP Rule 13 (2000) governs compulsory 
counterclaims , and provides: 
A pleading shall state as a counterclaim any claim 
which at the time of serving the pleading the pleader 
has against any opposing party, if it arises out of 
the transaction or occurrence that is the subject 
matter of the opposing party’s claim and does not 
require for its adjudication the presence of third 
parties of whom the court cannot acquire jurisdiction. 
But the pleader need not state the claim if (1) at the 
time the action was commenced the claim was the 
subject of another pending action or (2) the opposing 
party brought suit upon the claim by attachment or 
other process by which the court did not acquire 
jurisdiction to render a personal judgment on that 
claim, and the pleader is not stating any counterclaim 
under this Rule 13.  
Compulsory counterclaim rules incorporate common law 
principles of res judicata. Priceline.com, Inc. v. Director of 
Taxation, 144 Hawaiʻi 72, 92 n.25, 436 P.3d 1155, 1175 n.25 
(2019) (cleaned up).  Res judicata principles protect litigants 
by relieving  parties of the cost and vexation of multiple 
lawsuits and ensuring finality, thus permitting reliance on 
adjudication, and serve to conserve judicial resources and 
prevent inconsistent decisions. Priceline.com, 144 Hawai ʻi at 
85, 436 P.3d at 1168 (cleaned up).  Res judicata limits  a 
litigant to one opportunity to litigate aspects of the case to 
prevent inconsistent results and multiplicity of suits and to 
promote finality and judicial economy. Mortgage Elec. 
31    
   
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
Registration Sys., Inc. v. Wise , 130 Hawaiʻi 11, 17, 304 P.3d 
1192, 1198 (2013) (c leaned up). Additionally, res judicata 
precludes not only the relitigation of claims or defenses that 
were litigated in a previous lawsuit, but also of all claims and 
defenses that might have been properly litigated but were not 
litigated or decided. Wise, 130 Hawaiʻi at 18, 304 P.3d at 1199. 
Accordingly, before Reyes-Toledo II, we barred litigants 
from  raising objections like standing and asserting separate 
claims Truth in Lending Act (“TILA”) claims after the final 
foreclosure judgment had  been issued.   Wise, 130 Hawaiʻi at 19, 
304 P.3d at 1200 (where the petitioners raised respondent’s 
alleged lack of  standing as a defense to the foreclosure 
proceeding, but did not appeal from the final foreclosure 
judgment, we found that their objections were barred by res 
judicata). In  Eastern Savings Bank, FSB v. Esteban, we ruled 
that where the defendants did not appeal the court’s order foreclosing the property, TILA claims could have been raised in 
the foreclosure action.  129 Hawaiʻ i 154, 162, 296 P.3d 1062, 1070  
(2013).   
The Domingos’ first circuit lawsuit is precisely the kind 
of repetitive litigation that res judicata principles underlying 
compulsory counterclaims is intended to prevent. We therefore 
hold that in addition to the ir first circuit lawsuit being an 
improper collateral attack on the foreclosure and confirmation 
32    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
judgments, the claims they asserted in their first circuit 
lawsuit were compulsory counterclaim s under HRCP Rule 13. 
Because Wilmington’s foreclosure judgment and their first 
circuit law suit were filed before Reyes-Toledo II , the Domingos 
cannot claim reliance its language that might have suggested 
wrongful foreclosure claims are not compulsory counterclaims. 
According to Wise and Esteban, their first circuit lawsuit was a 
compulsory counterclaim. 
We recognize, however, that it is possible some litigants 
did not file their wrongful foreclosure claims as compulsory 
counterclaims based on Reyes-Toledo II . We therefore hold that 
if a litigant filed a separate wrongful foreclosure lawsuit 
instead of a counterclaim before entry of a foreclosure judgment 
after October 9, 2018, when Reyes-Toledo II was originally 
published, up until the date of this opinion, that separate 
lawsuit is not subject to dismissal based on the compulsory 
counterclaim rule. After the date of this opinion, however, the 
compulsory counterclaim rule applies to wrongful foreclosure 
claims. 
33    
   
 Based on the reasoning above, we affirm the ICA’s December 
29, 2023 “Order Dismi ssing Appeal as Moot by Ginoza, Chief 
Judge.”  ** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ** 
V. Conclusion 
Frederick J. Arensmeyer   /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
for petitioner  
      /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
David B. Rosen  
(Christina C. MacLeod,   /s/ Todd W. Eddins  
with him on the briefs)  
for respondent     /s/ Catherine H. Remigio  
 
     /s/ Kevin A.K. Souza  
 
34 