 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000962 10-DEC-2014 
08:20 AM 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
LETITIA HARTER,
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-12-0000962 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-12-0000962; CR. NO. 11-1-1063) 
December 10, 2014 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
This case concerns a defendant’s right in a criminal 
case to be represented by counsel free from divided loyalties. 
Our decision addresses whether Letitia Harter’s request for 
substitution of counsel should have been granted by the trial 
court. 
The court denied the request for new counsel, and 
following trial, a jury convicted Harter of all the charges  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
against her. Harter appealed from the Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence (judgment of conviction) of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court). 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the 
judgment of conviction in its Memorandum Opinion filed January 28, 2014. We conclude the circuit court erred in not conducting a penetrating and comprehensive inquiry regarding the conflict of interest between Harter and her counsel, and we also find that Harter did not voluntarily consent to the attorney-client relationship. Therefore, under our law, the denial of Harter’s motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel resulted in the derogation of Harter’s right to effective assistance of 
counsel. Accordingly, the ICA Judgment on Appeal and the 
judgment of conviction are vacated, and the case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
The charges in this case arose from a May 1, 2011 
incident at Club 939, a Honolulu nightclub. The police came to Club 939 in response to a call made by Harter complaining of sexual harassment. The testimony is conflicting as to what 
happened when the police arrived, but an officer testified that 
he attempted to arrest Harter for disorderly conduct. The officer testified that Harter resisted the arrest, and while he 
2
  
 
 
  
                         
  
 
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
tried to “gain control” of her, “unfortunately she swung over” 
and scratched his chin. Harter was arrested following the 
incident, and on May 5, 2011, the State of Hawai ʻi (State) filed 
a complaint against Harter in the District Court of the First 
Circuit (district court), charging her with the following offenses: (1) assault against a law enforcement officer in the 
second degree, in violation of Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 
707-712.6 (Supp. 2012);
1 (2) resisting arrest, in violation of 
HRS § 710-1026(1)(a) (1993 & Supp. 2012);2 and (3) disorderly 
conduct in violation of HRS § 711-1101(1)(c) (1993 & Supp. 
2012).3 
1 HRS § 707-712.6, Assault against a Law Enforcement Officer in the
Second Degree, in relevant part, provides the following: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault against a law
enforcement officer in the second degree if the person
recklessly causes bodily injury to a law enforcement
officer who is engaged in the performance of duty. 
2 HRS § 710-1026, Resisting arrest, in relevant part, provides the
following: 
(1) A person commits the offense of resisting arrest if
the person intentionally prevents a law enforcement officeracting under color of the law enforcement officer'sofficial authority from effecting an arrest by: 
(a) Using or threatening to use physical force against
the law enforcement officer or another . . . . 
3 HRS § 711-1101, Disorderly Conduct, in relevant part, provides
the following: 
(1) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct
if, with intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by
a member or members of the public, or recklessly creating a
risk thereof, the person: 
(continued . . .) 
3
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
                                                                               
 
 
  
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
At the August 2, 2011 arraignment, Harter requested a 
jury trial. The district court committed Harter for trial to 
the circuit court and scheduled arraignment before the circuit court on August 15, 2011. 
A. Counsel Appointments and Trial Scheduling 
Harter appeared in custody for arraignment, and the 
circuit court set trial call for September 26, 2011, and trial 
for October 3, 2011.
4 The Office of the Public Defender was 
appointed as Harter’s counsel. 
The trial week was continued to November 14, 2011,5 and 
trial call was later rescheduled to December 5, 2011. 
On December 5, 2011, the circuit court granted 
Harter’s request for a continuance because the State was unable to produce requested police reports and defense counsel indicated the defense’s intent to subpoena these documents from the Honolulu Police Department (HPD). However, at the next scheduled trial date on January 23, 2012, Harter’s deputy public defender informed the circuit court that Harter asked him to 
(continued . . .) 
. . . 
(c) Subjects another person to offensively coarse
behavior or abusive language which is likely toprovoke a violent response . . . . 
4 Harter did not appear at the initial arraignment date. 
5 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presided over the circuit
court proceedings in this case. 
4
  
 
 
   
 
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
withdraw as counsel. Harter explained to the court that she was 
unsatisfied with her counsel.6 The circuit court granted the 
motion to withdraw and set a new trial week for February 21, 2011. Te-Hina Ickes was appointed as Harter’s new counsel. 
Following Ickes’ appointment, Harter’s trial was 
continued on four other occasions—twice by stipulation and once by Harter—until July 30, 2012. The last continuance was due to the State not being prepared to proceed to trial because the complaining witness was on military leave. Ickes objected to the State’s request and asserted the defense was prepared to proceed to trial. The court indicated this was the “fourth time that the State [was] not ready to proceed,” but the court 
granted the State’s oral motion for a continuance and set the 
new trial date for August 13, 2012. 
B. Ickes’ Motion to Withdraw 
On August 13, 2012, in a hearing before the circuit 
court, Ickes made an oral motion to withdraw as counsel:  
I’ve just been informed by Ms. Harter prior to coming into
court today that [she is] unhappy with my services andwould like me to withdraw . . . I don’t know if your Honorneeds to hear any more from me. It’s Ms. Harter that’s – 
that’s taken issue with my representation. 
6 Specifically, Harter complained that she was unable to schedule
an appointment although she “tried and tried.” She also noted that when she 
finally did meet with her public defender that he told her, “You’re crazy,”after she told him that she had “a new job as an MTV assistant castingdirector.” Harter also claimed that her public defender would “put [her]
down” and “negat[e] every single thing” she asked him to do. 
5
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The circuit court responded by noting Ickes’ level of 
preparation and that Ickes had been Harter’s counsel for over six months. 
The circuit court posited that Ickes had met with 
Harter “several times” at Ickes’ office. Ickes, however, indicated she only had one scheduled meeting with Harter that lasted an hour and five minutes on March 8th and their “other discussions happened over the phone and before and following court.” The circuit court also stated it was familiar with Ickes’ work and diligence in her investigation including locating a witness on the mainland. Ickes responded, “Judge, actually, that never panned out. I did attempt calls and 
writing, but that never turned into anything.” 
The circuit court then verified with the State that 
there were less than thirty pages of discovery. The prosecutor 
indicated there was also a CD that included a 911 call. Ickes related that, upon reviewing the discovery, she did not have any record of having ever received the CD from the prosecutor’s office. 
In elaborating on her reasons in support of her motion 
to withdraw as counsel, Ickes stated Harter was “unhappy” with Ickes’ representation. Ickes listed some of Harter’s complaints about Ickes: she was “not prepared”; she was “not paying enough 
6
  
 
 
  
(Emphases added). Ickes also suggested withdrawal was 
necessary for her own professional interest, to protect herself from subsequent claims of ineffective assistance of counsel, and to secure Harter’s right to effective assistance of counsel: 
 
 
  The circuit court responded that it was aware of 
Ickes’ reputation for honesty and integrity and commended Ickes for being a “hard working attorney.” The court noted that just 
because attorneys do not contact their client, the complainant, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
attention to her case”; she did not return Harter’s phone calls; 
and she did not have “enough time to prepare to begin with trial tomorrow.” Ickes explained: 
I think . . . she just feels like I’m not prepared . . . to
proceed in her defense. And, you know, any implications ofme being ineffective, if she’s unhappy with how I conductmyself during the trial, if how I conducted myself inpreparing for her trial, you know, 
that goes to my
credibility as a lawyer, and it’s -- it -- I apologize,Judge, I’m not exactly sure how to frame this, butessentially she’s unhappy with my representation, and shedoes not want me to represent her anymore. She hasindicated to me that she has consulted another attorney,
but in effect has used the words that I want to fire you
right before this hearing. 
So for those reasons, Judge, for my professional stake in
this, and for Ms. Harter’s well-being -- I mean, she isfacing these criminal charges, and she is entitled to
effective assistance of counsel
. If I feel like perhaps
there might be some later allegations of me being
ineffective, me neglecting her, I certainly need to protect
myself. So for those reasons, your Honor, . . . I feel
like I . . . need to make this motion to withdraw and 
assure the Court that it’s not any strategy on my part totry and, you know, waste this Court’s time and push thiscase any further back than it needs to go. 
(Emphases added). 
7
  
 
 
or other witnesses, it does not necessarily mean they “are 
incapable of performing outstandingly at time of trial.” The court stated that it did “not doubt” Ickes was prepared for trial, noting she declared she was ready on July 16th. The 
circuit court emphasized it was taking Ickes at her word and 
also “based on her reputation for honesty and integrity within our court system.” The court stated it was “not inclined” to allow Ickes to withdraw at “this late date.” 
  In response, Ickes 
continued to describe her inability to communicate with Harter as a basis for her oral motion to withdraw: 
  
  Harter addressed the court and stated her reasons for 
requesting Ickes’ withdrawal: 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[A]nother reason I think it might impede Ms. Harter’s right
to a fair trial is that there’s that communication 
breakdown between the two of us. 
She doesn’t -- I believe 
she no longer trusts me . . . It’s really going to impede
my ability 
to prepare her or advise her regarding her
potential or her rights to testify in her own defense . . .
my ability to actually sit down with her and prepare forpotential cross-examination . . . I think that wouldinfringe on her right to a fair trial . . . if she doesn’ttrust me . . . . 
(Emphases added). 
I’ve only had one meeting with her,  and every month
multiple times a month I’ve asked to schedule anothermeeting just to know what’s been going on with my case, ifanything. 
Because before we had nothing, . . . I told her
what had happened and how I didn’t have any understanding
of what was going on. 
. . . And like I’ve said, I’ve never been contactedwhatsoever about my case, and I’ve just asked for anyknowledge or a meeting or anything
. 
8
  
 
 
  
  
  The court noted that a jury had already been ordered 
and re-affirmed its determination that Harter would be able to 
prepare for trial with her counsel “in the little time” she had left because there were “only a few pages of discovery.” The circuit court concluded the hearing by stating that it wanted 
Ickes and Harter to “talk outside”: 
 
                         
 7   Rule 48 refers to Hawai ʻi Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 48, which
sets forth a six-month period for trial to commence after a prescribed event
has occurred and also establishes excludable periods for purpose of time
computation. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Emphases added). Harter then discussed the periods of trial 
delays: 
This case has been going on almost two years. I’ve never 
waived the Rule 48. . . . I’ve been here every single timeon time. There was one where I was like an hour late, andthen it was rescheduled. And for that I had a bench warrant, and I was in jail for two months when my court
date was scheduled one day later. And I never did 
anything. 
The court asked the prosecutor for his Rule 48 calculation.7 
After obtaining an expiration date of September 27, 2012, the 
court indicated it would do its own calculation and instructed defense counsel to also do a recalculation. 
 
It is my belief that a jury on this case has already been
ordered
 for this trial. I believe that . . . because she’s 
one of the better ones that we have in town,  that you can
work together and prepare for this in the little time you
have left between now because it’s only a few pages ofdiscovery that we’re really talking about, and it's frommultiple sources. . . . 
. . . 
. . . So this case will proceed tomorrow. I want both of
you -- you and your attorney to talk outside, and tomorrow 
9
  
 
 
  
 
 
HARTER:
 
COURT:
 HARTER:
 
 
 
Harter was apparently speaking loudly, and the court informed 
her to lower her voice, warned her about interrupting the court, and directed her to follow the instructions of the court. 
 The court resumed its inquiry into Harter’s failure to 
follow its order to meet with her attorney. Harter tried to explain she had gone to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel: 
 
HARTER: 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
morning at 8:30 I want you guys back here for further
status hearing. 
(Emphases added). 
At the beginning of the status hearing the next 
morning, the circuit court inquired into whether Harter followed 
the court’s “order” to talk to her attorney “as soon as court was completed.” During the course of this exchange, Harter indicated she did not meet with Ickes: 
THE COURT:  Ms. Harter, please stand. The Court yesterday
ordered you to talk to your attorney as soon as court was
completed . . . yesterday. 
Did you do so? 
 No. 
 Why not? 
 I didn’t hear you say that I needed to talk to my
attorney. 

THE COURT:  I made myself very clear yesterday to you. 
HARTER: I didn’t hear it. It was not very clear to me. 
THE COURT:  Okay. Now, when the Court orders you to do
something, you do it. 
I’ve been notified now by you that
you did not stay around to meet with your attorney. 
I went to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel. 
THE COURT: I didn’t ask you why. I didn’t ask you why.
Today, when you arrived, did you talk to your
attorney? 
10
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
HARTER: 
 
THE COURT:
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HARTER: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. And what was the results of that 
conversation? 
HARTER: I had already pled not guilty, and she wanted to
know if I’d change my plea to say no contest, that there
would be some kind of deal arranged. But then she said 
that there would be no way to appeal or address this casein any way, and there’s already an investigator on this
case from yesterday. 
And he said it’s a hate crime. To
get another lawyer because it’s a hate crime.  
THE COURT: Who said it’s a hate crime? 
The other investigator because the people -- when
all the police showed up and stuff, they were saying that I
was a white haole bitch and a tourist, and when -- as soon
as I told them I had lived here for 16 years, that’s whenthe courts actually let me out of jail three days later. 
 
Okay. 
HARTER: Because they thought I was a tourist the whole
time. 
(Emphases added). The circuit court then asked Harter about the 
status of her relationship with Ickes and also evaluated the level of preparation required for the case: 
THE COURT:  What’s the current status of your employment
with your attorney? 
HARTER: 
I don’t know what you’re asking. 
THE COURT:  
Well, I can tell you that she has done her
homework. She has represented to the Court that she did
get the discovery. She has reviewed the discovery. 
By the way, the Court will obtain a copy of the policereports and seal it so that any appellate court reviewingthis matter will know how small the discovery is, and myguesstimate is that only nine pages of substance areactually typewritten of which it’s divided between three
witnesses who saw the same thing. And so you’re only
really talking about three – three pages of police reportof really true substance about the facts of this case. 
 
I would determine that going over that police report,
analyzing it is a matter of an hour, maybe two hours of
which the defense attorney has indicated to the Court that
it has. Defense attorney on behalf of you declared ready 
11
  
 
 
  
(Emphases added). The circuit court stated that it understood 
the “sole or the focal” reason Harter was not able to work with 
her counsel was because Ickes did not return Harter’s phone calls the previous week. Harter responded that the problem had started much earlier: 
 
  The court questioned why Harter had not raised these 
concerns about Ickes’ “unresponsiveness” at the previous court hearing. 
 
HARTER: 
 
 
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
which told the Court that she was ready for trial and able
to represent you at trial on June 16th of this year. 
Actually, since the very beginning  I had one meeting with
her, and every -- at least every month to every two weeks Iwas giving her a call saying that I needed her to call me.
I needed to set up another interview or meeting of some
sort.
 I have papers to give you. If you could give me a
call back or send me an e-mail, anything. I never once
received a phone call or an e-mail or any of the sort, and
I’ve left messages with her office . . . 
(Emphases added). 
THE COURT:  My question to you is on July 16th, the last
time you appeared, when you heard your attorney declare
that you guys were ready for trial, how come you didn’t
bring that up at that time? 
I was never addressed in court. I just would stand
here and not say anything this whole time. And now that
I’ve started to say something, I’ve been threatened with
the sheriff.[8] 
THE COURT: So you -- so you’re -- all of a sudden you’re –
you’re saying something? 
I mean, it would have appeared to
me that when you appeared to me on February, in April, inMay, in -- in July, you should have said something to me atthat time. 
8 At one point Ickes told Harter not to interrupt the circuit court
judge, warning her, “He’s going to call the sheriff.” 
12
  
 
 
  
 The court concluded its colloquy by asking Harter 
if she could work with Ickes, and Harter’s response related 
to not having been asked about waiving Rule 48.  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HARTER: From April until now, we were still waiting to hear
back from the Honolulu Police Commission because my report
was never put into the paperwork as part of the police
reports, which is what I was trying to do. And it’s been 5
1/2 months instead of six weeks, which is -- is as long asit takes. 
(Emphases added). 
THE COURT: Well, this case has been hanging around long
enough, and I’m not going to let any more cobwebs collecton this case. 
Is it your determination that you can work with your
attorney? 
HARTER: Well, also before when the -- I guess the Rule 48
was waived, I was never asked if I wanted to waive the Rule
48. Like, again, I was never addressed and asked that
question. 
Just like everybody else has been asked since
I’ve been sitting here all this time, I was never asked if
that was okay. 
(Emphases added). The court did not inquire further into 
whether Harter believed that she could work with Ickes as her counsel. 
The circuit court then explained its analysis of 
Harter’s motion to substitute counsel under a four-prong test for substitution of counsel from United States v. Doe, 272 F.3d 116 (2nd Cir. 2001). As to the first factor, “whether Defendant made a timely motion requesting new counsel,” the court found the motion was untimely given that it was “the eve of trial.” Second, the circuit court found that it “adequately inquired into the matter” because it “did a searching and probing inquiry 
13
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
HARTER:
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
into the defendant.” During the court’s discussion of the third 
factor, “whether the conflict between the defendant and her attorney was so great that it resulted . . . in a total lack of communication preventing an adequate defense,” Harter 
interjected that “there was such a lack of communication” that 
she “didn’t even know it was the eve of trial.” With respect to the fourth prong, the court found Harter was responsible for the breakdown in communication, noting that Harter had not met with her counsel the previous day as required and that earlier that morning Harter’s voice was “enraged” at her counsel: 
THE COURT:  Okay. Well, then the fourth factor is whether
the defendant substantially and unjustifiably contributed

to the breakdown in the communication, and I also find
that. When the Court ordered you to -- to talk to your
attorney yesterday, and you walked out of here and kept on
going despite the fact that the Court told you to talk to
your attorney
 – 
HARTER: I didn’t hear it. I just told you that. 

THE COURT: -- and yesterday I told you to be back at 8:30
and you didn’t. And now I find out that -- that you were
outside with -- with your voice enraged at your attorney.
You don't do that. 
 No, she was yelling at me.  I wasn't yelling at
her. 
THE COURT: . . . [I]t doesn’t matter. When this arguments
happen like this, you know, I -- yesterday when you left
here, you were responsible for the breakdown, and I think
the record is quite clear from my colloquy with you that,you know, a relationship as far as an attorney-clientrelationship with you need to understand cannot be one-sided. 
(Emphases added). 
The circuit court concluded Ickes was properly 
prepared to represent Harter. The court ruled that it did not 
14
  
 
 
  
 
THE COURT: That’s not my question to you, young lady.
Do you understand what I have told you? 
 
HARTER:
 
THE COURT: 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
find “good grounds” to discharge Ickes and consequently required 
Harter to choose between two options: “either . . . keep” Ickes, or “proceed to trial this morning by yourself.” The court explained to Harter that the question was whether her attorney 
is properly prepared to go to trial, and the court found “yes” 
that Ickes was “ample and ready” to defend Harter’s interests “zealously.” The circuit court emphasized to Harter that she was entitled to counsel only if the court were to find “good cause” to discharge Ickes. The court further explained that since there was “no valid reason for the discharge” the court was “not required to appoint substitute counsel” to represent her, and if she continued to demand substitution, the court “may 
in its discretion discharge counsel and require the defendant to 
proceed to trial without representation.” The court then asked Harter if she understood, and Harter was not responsive to the question: 
HARTER: I was call -- I was speaking to an attorney last
night. 

 Not really. 

Okay. Let me break it down for you. If I find 
that there is good grounds for you to fire your attorney
and if I find that there is no valid reason for discharging
your attorney, and I’m finding that, I have to advise you
that either you’re going to keep her, or you’re going to
proceed to trial this morning by yourself. 
 
HARTER: I don’t wanna go by myself. 

15
  
 
 
  
HARTER: 
 
 
 
 
 
 After the parties returned from the recess and the 
court resumed the proceedings, the court noted communication between Harter and Ickes was “at least opened” and they were communicating.
9  
C. Trial  
 After the jury was released for the day on the first 
day of trial, the court cautioned Harter about the manner in which she spoke to her counsel during Ickes’ cross-examination of Officer Gonzales because of its negative effect upon the jury: 
                         
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
THE COURT: Then you are obligated to talk to her. 
I was trying to. 
THE COURT: Okay. Then I will give you that opportunity.
This Court will be in recess for half an hour. Call 
downstairs and subject to call, which means that I may call
this case earlier. 
Counsel for defense, actually . . . I want you to be back .
. . in your seats in 20 minutes. 

... 
Okay. You may go outside and confer about this case. If 
the defendant still wishes to have you represent her, I

will keep you. If she doesn’t, . . . I will take the 
proper steps. 
... 
And she will go to trial alone, by herself, without an
attorney, but we’re going to trial this morning. 
(Emphases added). 
THE COURT: . . . I know that you’re – you’re zealous in
what you’re doing. 
But whenever you stand up, the – the 
9 Similarly, after the Tachibana advisory, following voir dire, and
after the jury was sent to deliberate, the court noted that Harter was
communicating with Ickes. Neither Harter nor her counsel specifically
responded to the court’s statements. 
16
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
jury stops listening to what your attorney is saying, and
they start looking at you. And so you don’t want todistract the jury from what your attorney is trying to
accomplish. 
And number two, it’s important that whatever you tell your
attorney is in confidence, and when you speak louder than
what is normal, the prosecutors can hear, and you don’t
want your opponents to hear what you’re saying. And so I
ask that you tone down -- you know, just have theconversation between you and your attorney. I’ve been usingthis white noise to -- to keep -- you know, to at least dothe static noise to keep your conversation with your
attorney as private as can, but just know that whatever you
say, if you say it a little louder than normal, the otherside will hear, and you don't want that. Okay. 
(Emphases added). While the court was discussing jury 
instructions, Harter said she “actually believe[d]” this was a 
“case of mistaken identity,” and she asked the court for advice about bringing a witness to testify. The court responded, “That’s one of the things you need to talk to your attorney.” 
The next day, on direct examination, Harter described 
her employment as a “dancer and a hostess” at a nightclub called Femme Nu. Harter indicated she was also starting a “modeling agency” for charity “with them as [her] sponsor.” 
Harter testified that on April 30, 2011, she worked at 
Femme Nu until about 10:00 p.m. She and several friends decided to go to Club 939 because Harter was interested in applying for a job there. While at Club 939, she bought drinks for her friends, and she drank two “pineapple and vodka[s].” 
Harter testified that she obtained a job application 
and went to grab a chair to sit down. She stated that a bouncer 
17
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
approached her and “want[ed] [her] to move away from the pole on 
the ground.” The bouncer “pat[ted] [her] back,” and Harter told the bouncer that “it hurt” when he did that. Harter claimed that the bouncer was “seven feet tall and 500 pounds” and that 
the bouncer’s “patting” caused her “crippling pain” that “hurt 
to [her] fingertips and . . . toes.” Harter stated she “was in shock because of how bad it hurt,” because she “hadn’t been touched for about six months” having just gotten out of an engagement. Harter later acknowledged that her description of the bouncer was “an exaggeration” and that “he was a very big bouncer.” 
Harter testified that after she told the bouncer his 
pat on her back hurt her, “he did it again as [she] was bending over to grab a chair.” She claimed the bouncer grabbed both of her wrists, “dangle[d]” her, and called her a “whore.” The bouncer, she said, then pushed her into the lobby. At some point, Harter called 911 because she wanted to “file a report” regarding the alleged attack. 
Several officers testified that on May 1, 2011, they 
responded to an incident at Club 939 between Harter and a 
bouncer. Officer Vincent Gonzales, the complainant in the 
assault charge, testified that during the course of trying to control the situation, Harter became unruly and pushed him in 
18
  
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the chest, swung her arm, pulled at his shirt, and 
“unfortunately” scratched his chin causing him to bleed. Only Officer Gonzales testified that Harter scratched him; the other three responding officers testified that they did not witness 
Harter scratch Officer Gonzales. 
Harter’s testimony regarding the incident was 
sometimes disjointed and bizarre. Harter claimed Officer 
Gonzales was not present during the incident and that all the officers who had testified, with the exception of Officer Uno, were “stand-ins” who had the case confused with another incident that happened with a different girl. 
Harter described the arrest as follows: “[T]hey had me 
pinned on the ground . . . He’s laughing that I’m resisting . . . my shirt is completely off. My pants are falling down . . . I was completely exposed in front of 40-plus people in front of 939.” Harter claimed her shoulder hurt for over a month. Harter also stated she thought she “might be shorter” because her calves and feet had “been in pain.” Harter elaborated, “My muscles are contracted instead of relaxed, so it puts pressure on my height and my bones and stuff.” 
Harter insisted that she was not arrested by Officer 
Gonzales, but instead, that she was arrested by an unidentified, “very short,” “old man” who had “gray hair and a mustache” and 
19
  
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
was looking at her “like, just adoring.” When asked how she was 
behaving prior to her arrest, Harter stated, “[T]he old man . . . he was talking to me, and he . . . wanted to see how I talked . . . . I don’t know how to explain it, like –- because I was 
out with a pro surfer that night. It was like our first -– one 
of our first nights out, and I was getting a job, like I was pretty well-behaved.” 
Harter further testified that the old man who arrested 
her claimed that he could do whatever he wanted and stated, “We run these streets.” Harter described her response: 
Waikiki is not the streets. It’s one of the top ten
tourist destinations of the world. And at that point, thecrowd gets up – riled up, like, yeah, and they startcheering. And so he feels that there’s -- they -- they'restarting to put themselves and separate the officer from
me, because for ten minutes of this conversation, he was
walking around me in a circle and talking to me and seeing,like, what I would say and how I was responding to it. 
D. Verdict and Sentencing 
The jury found Harter guilty of the three charges. 
After the verdict was taken, Ickes made a Motion for Judgment 
Notwithstanding the Verdict (Motion for JNOV). The court did not require preparation of a pre-sentence diagnosis and report for sentencing. 
At the October 11, 2012 sentencing hearing, the court 
denied Harter’s Motion for JNOV. Harter was in custody because she failed to appear for argument on the Motion for JNOV on August 16, 2012. The State requested that Harter be given the 
20
  
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
maximum one-year sentence for the misdemeanor offenses. In her 
sentencing argument, Ickes noted that Harter had no prior arrests or convictions. Ickes argued that Harter was “likely to respond affirmatively to a probationary period and perhaps even 
with a special condition that she obtain and complete mental 
health treatment.” 
When Harter had an opportunity to address the court, 
her statements were disoriented and at times appeared irrational. Harter explained that her absence from the original sentencing hearing was because she was “talking with . . . the FBI and other investigators,” and she “had to miss meetings because of the apprehension on Pearl Harbor, because somebody 
stole her phone.” Harter claimed to have information from a 
Supreme Court Justice that Officer Gonzales was involved in a different incident, and she also stated that she had records to prove she was not intoxicated during the incident. Harter addressed the court as follows: 
MS. ICKES: . . . Do you want to say anything to the judge? 
HARTER: Well, yeah, I also had written a letter that I used to
have like $20 million, and I just lost my family and my fiancé.
And during this, I had lost three businesses, I believe, because
I had to stop and participate in the case and the things that I
had to stop doing for my businesses. 
And, yeah, I think that there’s definitely been a lot of
stress. I would like to get some mental health done. But I 
don’t think that I need to be in captivity anymore, because
I’ve -- I always do everything that I think is right. Andthis was definitely . . . a misunderstanding.
. . . . 
21
  
 
 
  
 
 
HARTER:
I -- so I was going to show up, but I was so freaked out,
like I went and -- I was -- I even got ready for court andeverything, and I just couldn’t do it, like I thought itwas so crazy. And I was terrified that something bad was
going to happen to me. 
 
Because even the judge before at District Court was
threatening me when I just walked in, before I even -- wenever even had trial. It was just the first preliminarywhere I met my public defender and everything. And he,
like, screamed over everybody that was in the court andsaid, I’m going to fry you, da, da, da. I’m pushing it tothe limit. You’re going to be in jail for three years, da,da, da. And I was like, I’m -- I’m going to go to trial,
because this is so crazy. 
 
 
And then when they found out that I was from Hawaii, then Iwas out last time in three days. So they thought that Iwas a tourist this whole time. That’s -- that was, like,their goal. And they thought I was a rich tourist, which
turned out, no, I’m somebody who’s local. 
 
I’m trying to do everything. I’ve been trying to go to –-
I want to go to school and have that done by Christmas.And like I said, I already have plans to be a missionary,
and anyone would -- could vouch for that, I guess. . . . 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
THE COURT: Is there anything else you think I should know?
Because you still haven’t answered my question. 
HARTER: What was your question? 
THE COURT: How come you didn’t show up for sentencing the
next day? 
 Because I felt that I didn’t need to be sentenced,
that it was so absurd that everything that I went through,
I never even got to finish my statement. I -- and the 
three guys weren’t even there the night that I was there.It was a completely mistaken identity.
  
So I’ve been so freaked out because of all of this. 
And 
everyone’s been so rough on me, when I tried to get helpbecause I was sexually assaulted, and my -- it was a footand a half away from my boyfriend the whole time. 
 
And then they -- they -- the police had – got my Alabama IDwhen I called, and they’re like, ho, she’s not even fromHawaii, like, we’re this -- they even said they’re a gang,
like they’re doing all this stuff to me. 
22
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Emphases added). The court then imposed the maximum one-year 
jail term in counts 1 and 2, and thirty days in count 3, with terms to run concurrently with one another. 
After the circuit court sentenced Harter, Ickes orally 
renewed her motion to withdraw and asked the court whether she should reargue the points that she had made in her previous motion to withdraw as counsel before trial. The circuit court granted the motion to withdraw without Ickes stating any reason for the motion other than Harter wished to appeal: 
MS. ICKES: Your Honor, may I address the Court briefly –-
THE COURT: Yes. 
MS. ICKES: -- on one additional matter? The Court is well 
aware of the history of this case and my appearances. I 
had attempted to withdraw prior to trial. Did the trial. Appeared this morning for the motion and the sentencing.In light of my previous arguments -- I don’t know if the
Court wants me to -- to reargue those points? 
 
THE COURT:
 
No, just make the motion. 
MS. ICKES:  
But I am -- I am renewing my motion to withdraw
as counsel and also asking that if new counsel can be
appointed for Ms. Harter. She’s indicated that she wants to pursue an appeal.
. . . THE COURT: Okay. Your motion is granted, then. A new 
attorney will be appointed for her. 
The hearing then concluded with Harter asking whether she had 
jail time to serve and requesting to go to the state hospital. 
HARTER: I have questions. So do I have jail time to
serve? 
THE COURT: 
Your new attorney will -- will discuss that
with you. This matter’s concluded. 
HARTER: 
I also wanted to --
23
  
 
 
  
HARTER:
  
 
  
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
THE LAW CLERK: 
All rise. 
 
-- ask to go to state hospital, sir. 
On October 11, 2012, the circuit court filed the 
judgment of conviction. The court filed an Order Appointing 
Counsel on October 12, 2012, which stated that the court found good cause for appointment of substitute counsel. 
E. Harter’s Motion to Reconsider Sentence 
On December 19, 2012, Harter, through her newly 
appointed counsel, filed a Motion to Reconsider Sentence. In 
her motion, Harter made the following arguments: (1) the sentence imposed was “excessive in light of her record”; (2) 
although a pre-sentence investigation was neither requested nor 
ordered, such an investigation would have shown that it was “apparent” that she had “mental health concerns”; (3) Harter’s 
mental health concerns were not being addressed in the O ʻahu 
Community Correctional Center; and (4) Harter had applied to the Poʻailani dual-diagnosis treatment program and Ho ʻomau Ke Ola 
dual-diagnosis treatment program and was awaiting an assessment. 
The motion to reconsider was denied.
10 
10 The court was informed during oral argument that Harter served
the entire one-year sentence. MP3: Oral Argument Before the Hawai ʻi Supreme
Court, No. SCWC-12-0000962 Thursday, August 7, 2014, 8:45 a.m., available at
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc_scwc_12_962.
html. 
24
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
On January 11, 2013, Harter filed a Notice of Appeal 
from the judgment of conviction. 
F. Intermediate Court of Appeals 
1. Opening Brief 
In her first point of error on appeal to the ICA, 
Harter contended that the circuit court abused its discretion in 
denying the motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel. The circuit court, Harter argued, did not conduct a “penetrating and comprehensive examination” to “determine the nature and extent” of the issues that had arisen between Harter and her 
counsel, as required by
 State v. Soares,  81 Hawai ʻi 332, 916 P.2d 
1233, (App. 1996), overruled by State v. Janto, 92 Hawai ʻi 19, 
986 P.2d 306 (1999). Instead, the court “focused on its own 
belief that the case was relatively simple, that a jury panel had already been ordered and its own perception that Ickes was a ‘hard working attorney’ and ‘one of the better [attorneys] that we have in town.’” (Alteration in original). Harter contended the circuit court applied a “mechanical test” developed by the 
Second Circuit Court of Appeals “in direct contravention of the 
ICA’s holding in Soares” requiring that each case be “evaluated 
on its particular circumstance.” (Citing Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi at 
355, 916 P.2d at 1256). 
25
  
 
 
   In support of her second point of error, Harter argued 
that under HRS §§ 704-40311 and 704-404,12 the circuit court erred 
by failing to, sua sponte, suspend the proceedings in order to 
conduct an evidentiary hearing on Harter’s competence to stand 
trial because there were “sufficient indicators . . . to raise a 
good faith doubt as to her competence to stand trial.” Harter contended Soares requires “[g]enuine doubt, not a synthetic or constructive doubt” as to “competence.” (Quoting Soares, 81 
Hawaiʻi at 348, 916 P.2d at 1249). She also maintained that her 
mental condition clearly “affected her ability to assist in her 
                         
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 HRS § 704-403 (1993), provides, in relevant part the following: 
No person who as a result of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defeat lacks capacity to understand the
proceedings against the person or to assist in the person’s
own defense shall be tried, convicted, or sentenced for thecommission of an offense so long as such incapacityendures. 
12 Pursuant to HRS § 704-404(1) (Supp. 2012), 
[If] there is reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to
proceed, or reason to believe that the physical or mentaldisease, disorder, or defect of the defendant will or hasbecome an issue in the case, the court may immediatelysuspend all further proceedings in the prosecution. If a
trial jury has been empanelled, it shall be discharged or
retained at the discretion of the court. The discharge ofthe trial jury shall not be a bar to further prosecution. 
Pursuant to HRS § 704-404(2), after suspending the proceedings,
the court must then appoint “one qualified examiner in nonfelony cases to
examine and report upon the physical and mental condition of the defendant.” 
26
  
 
 
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
defense,” while her bizarre statements during trial affected her 
credibility with the jury.13 
2. Answering Brief 
In its Answering Brief, the State maintained the 
circuit court did not abuse its broad discretion in denying Harter’s motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel. 
The 
State argued Harter’s allegation that Ickes was not spending enough time on her case was “a far cry” from the 
Soares 
requirement of “a complete breakdown in communication or irreconcilable conflict between a defendant and his or her counsel which leads to an apparently unjust verdict.” The State further argued that any breakdown in communication was “easily 
resolved” by the circuit court’s “urging and ordering Harter to 
communicate with Ickes.” The State concluded that “because the withdrawal request was made on the eve of trial and the communication problem between Harter and Ickes was resolved prior to trial,” there was no good cause to substitute court-appointed counsel. 
In regard to the second point of error, the State 
argued Harter was fit to stand trial because she met the 
requirements set forth in 
Janto, 92 Hawai ʻi 19, 986 P.2d 306: 
13 Harter also argued Ickes’ failure to object to an officer’s
testimony that he believed Harter was on drugs constituted ineffective
assistance of counsel. 
27
  
 
 
  
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“[A] defendant must (1) understand the proceedings against her, 
(2) be able to assist in her defense . . . in accordance with state and federal constitutional due process concerns, [and] (3) have the ability to consult with counsel.” 
The State argued that the record reflects Harter 
“understood the proceedings against her, consulted with counsel, and assisted in her defense.” 
The State maintained that Harter 
“had a flair for drama and exaggerated often during her conversations with the court” and that she was simply “eccentric, quirky, even fragile” but “was nonetheless able to follow the court’s and counsel’s directions and responded appropriately.”
14 
3. ICA Memorandum Opinion 
In its Memorandum Opinion, the ICA affirmed the 
circuit court’s judgment of conviction. First, the ICA held the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Harter’s motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel. The ICA found the circuit court “thoroughly examined the basis for Harter’s request, counsel’s readiness for trial, and other facts and circumstances, including that the request was made on the 
14 In her reply brief, Harter reiterated that the circuit court
“placed undue emphasis on its perception of Ickes’ reputation and its
perceived simplicity of the case,” while ignoring the apparent strainedrelationship between Harter and Ickes. In support of her second point oferror, Harter emphasized that her irregular conduct and statements affected
her ability to present a defense. 
28
  
 
 
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
eve of trial, a month after defense counsel confirmed her 
readiness to proceed to trial.” The ICA also noted the circuit court “engaged in an in-depth dialogue with both Harter and her appointed counsel.” 
As to Harter’s second point of error, the ICA found it 
could not conclude that the circuit court “plainly erred in failing to
 sua sponte hold a competency hearing.”  The ICA noted 
that questions of fitness are “best resolved at the pretrial stage” and that the question of Harter’s fitness “was not raised before or during trial.” The ICA found a “significant issue” with the fact that there were no known prior medical opinions concerning Harter’s mental health. It was also significant to 
the ICA’s analysis that Ickes did not “raise any concern about 
Harter’s ability to participate in her defense based on competence” since Ickes was in the “best position to observe Harter’s ability to participate in her defense.” 
The ICA summarized the record as reflecting “a mixed 
bag of appropriate behavior, where Harter appear[ed] to sometimes understand even fine nuances and details of the proceedings, and inappropriate, irrational, and potentially 
self-defeating – and perhaps delusional – behavior and 
statements.” 
The ICA proceeded to discuss some examples of 
Harter’s bizarre behavior and comments and provided alternative 
29
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
explanations for the behavior other than mental illness. For 
example, the ICA commented that “Harter’s rambling statement at sentencing—including wild assertions about having had $20 million dollars . . . and dating the son of a supreme court 
justice—could simply have reflected feeble attempts at avoiding 
imprisonment.” Although the ICA found Harter’s behavior to be troubling at times, it ultimately found that given the record below, it could not conclude that the circuit court plainly erred in failing to sua sponte hold a competency hearing. 
The ICA affirmed Harter’s convictions without 
prejudice to her raising and further developing the issue of her fitness to stand trial in a HRPP Rule 40 petition for post-
conviction relief. The ICA also held that Harter should not be 
foreclosed from raising the fitness issue stemming from HRS § 704-402(1) in conjunction with her ineffective assistance of counsel contentions.
15 
G. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
In her Application for Writ of Certiorari 
(Application), Harter presents the following questions pertinent to disposition of the Application: 
15 The ICA denied Harter’s argument that she received ineffective
assistance of counsel without prejudice to her raising it in a HRPP Rule 40
petition. 
30
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
1. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denyingHarter’s motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel? 
2. Whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in failing to
sua sponte  hold a hearing to determine Harter’s competence
to stand trial?
[16] 
Harter argues the ICA gravely erred in upholding the 
circuit court’s denial of her motion for withdrawal and 
substitution of counsel. Harter contends the circuit court failed to conduct a “penetrating and comprehensive” examination 
as required by 
Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi 332, 916 P.2d 1233, in 
determining the motion. Instead of applying Soares, Harter 
asserts the circuit court incorrectly applied a Second Circuit standard in “direct contravention” to Soares, and in doing so, the circuit court “failed to consider all of the particular circumstances of the case.” 
Harter further argues the circuit court placed too 
much significance on Ickes’ competence as a lawyer and her 
ability to provide adequate representation. 
Harter contends the 
circuit court’s finding that Ickes was a competent attorney did 
not mitigate the problems with the attorney-client relationship. Harter also claims the “court blithely ignored” Ickes’ admissions regarding their issues with communication and trust. 
16 In her Application Harter also raises her ineffective assistance
of counsel claim that she raised to the ICA. We do not address the 
competency of counsel in this case. 
31
  
 
 
      
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Because the circuit court did not conduct the required inquiry, 
Harter concludes the circuit court “could not properly determine whether there was good cause to warrant substitution of counsel.” 
As to the second issue presented, Harter argues the 
ICA should have found that the circuit court abused its discretion in failing to sua sponte hold a hearing to determine 
Harter’s competence to stand trial. 
Harter asserts that her 
conduct and statements made throughout the proceedings “raised a good faith doubt as to her competence to stand trial.” Harter points to numerous “bizarre statements” she made during the proceedings. Harter maintains her mental condition and “bizarre 
statements” not only “affected her credibility, but also, 
“clearly” affected her ability to meaningfully assist in her own defense. 
II. DISCUSSION 
A. Substitution of Court-Appointed Counsel 
“In our system of law one of the most fundamental 
rights guaranteed to an individual charged with crime is the right to have the assistance of counsel for his [or her] 
defense.” State v. Kane, 52 Haw. 484, 486, 479 P.2d 207, 208 
(1971). 
This “guarantee of assistance of counsel will not be 
satisfied by the mere formal appointment of an attorney,” and 
32
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
thus, the trial court has an ongoing duty to ensure that the 
right to the assistance of counsel is not an “illusory guarantee.” Id. at 486, 479 P.2d at 209. 
Although “there is no absolute right, constitutional 
or otherwise, for an indigent to have the court order a change in court-appointed counsel,” State v. Torres, 54 Haw. 502, 504, 
510 P.2d 494, 496 (1973), when an indigent defendant requests that appointed counsel be replaced, the “trial court has a duty to conduct a ‘penetrating and comprehensive examination’” of the defendant on the record, in order to ascertain the bases for the 
defendant’s request.” Soares,
 81 Hawai ʻi at 355, 916 P.2d at 
1256 (quoting Kane, 52 Haw. at 487-88, 479 P.2d at 209); see 
also Smith v. Lockhart, 923 F.2d 1314, 1320 (8th Cir. 1991). This “inquiry is necessary to protect the defendant’s right to 
effective representation of counsel,” Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi at 355, 
916 P.2d at 1256 (quoting Kane, 52 Haw. at 487-88, 479 P.2d at 
209), and it must be “the kind of inquiry that might ease the defendant’s dissatisfaction, distrust, or concern,” Lockhart,  
923 F.2d at 1320; 
United States v. Garcia, 924 F.2d 925, 926 
(9th Cir. 1991). 
The trial court’s inquiry must also be sufficient to 
enable the court to determine if there is “good cause” to 
warrant substitution of counsel. Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi at 355, 916 
33
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
P.2d at 1256. Whether there is “good cause” requiring 
substitution of counsel will depend on the facts of the case. Typically, “good cause” exists when there is a conflict of interest on the part of defense counsel, a complete breakdown in 
communication between the attorney and client, or an 
irreconcilable difference between the attorney and client. See, 
e.g., id. at 355, 916 P.2d at 1256 (collecting cases). 
1. Conflict of Interest Grounds 
a. Trial Court Duty to Inquire 
A trial judge is required to conduct a “penetrating 
and comprehensive” inquiry when he or she “reasonably should 
know” that a conflict of interest exists. Cuyler v. Sullivan, 
446 U.S. 335, 347 (1980). Once this duty to inquire is triggered, “it cannot be discharged by a perfunctory inquiry,” but rather, the duty is only met with “probing and specific questions” about the potential conflict. See Wayne R. LaFave et 
al., Criminal Procedure § 11.9(b)(3d ed.) (quoting Atley v. 
Ault, 21 F. Supp. 2d 949 (S.D. Iowa 1998), aff’d, 191 F.3d 865 
(8th Cir. 1999)). 
This strict requirement imposed upon trial courts to 
inquire into a potential conflict of interest is consistent with the long recognized principle “that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel contains a correlative right to representation that is unimpaired by conflicts of interest or divided loyalties.” 
34
  
 
 
Lockhart,
                          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 923 F.2d at 1320. Generally, “a conflict exists when 
an attorney is placed in a situation conducive to divided 
loyalties, and can include situations in which the caliber of an attorney’s services may be substantially diluted.” Id. 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Our decision 
in State v. Richie, 88 Hawai ʻi 19, 41, 960 P.2d 1227, 1249 
(1998), noted that concurrent representation of a defendant and 
an adverse witness is a “real conflict of interest” because such 
a situation is “inherently conducive to divided loyalties.” 
The Hawai ʻi Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 
1.7 (1994) provides that a “lawyer shall not represent a client if the representation of that client may be materially limited by the . . . lawyer’s own interests, unless (1) the lawyer reasonably believes the representation will not be adversely affected; and (2) the client consents after consultation.”
17    
17 Our analysis applies the 1994 HRAP Rule 1.7, which was in effect
during the circuit court proceedings. A new version of HRPC Rule 1.7 went 
into effect on January 1, 2014. The revised rule provides that a “concurrentconflict of interest exists if: . . . there is a significant risk that therepresentation of [a] client[] will be materially limited . . . by a personal
interest of the lawyer.” “Notwithstanding the existence of a concurrent
conflict of interest. . . , a lawyer may represent a client if: (1) thelawyer reasonably believes that the lawyer will be able to provide competentand diligent representation to [the] client; (2) the representation is notprohibited by law; . . . and ([3]) [the] client gives consent after
consultation, confirmed in writing.” HRAP Rule 1.7 (2014). 
35
  
 
 
Comment 4 to HRPC Rule 1.7, regarding “Loyalty to a 
Client,” describes how an actual conflict of interest may 
interfere with client representation: 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Loyalty to a client is also impaired when a lawyer cannot
consider, recommend or carry out an appropriate course ofaction for the client because of the lawyer’s otherresponsibilities or interests. 
The conflict in effect 
forecloses alternatives that would otherwise be available 
to the client. Paragraph (b) addresses such situations. A 
possible conflict does not itself preclude therepresentation. The critical questions are the likelihoodthat a conflict will eventuate and, if it does, whether it 
will materially interfere with the lawyer’s independent
professional judgment in considering alternatives or
foreclose courses of action that reasonably should bepursued on behalf of the client. 
Consideration should be 
given to whether the client wishes to accommodate the otherinterest involved. 
HRPC Rule 1.7 cmt 4 (1994) (emphases added); see also  HRPC Rule 
1.7 cmt 8 (2014) (“Even where there is no adversity of interest, 
a conflict of interest exists if there is a significant risk 
that a lawyer’s ability to consider, recommend, or carry out an 
appropriate course of action for the client will be materially limited as a result of the lawyer’s other responsibilities or interests.”). 
The possibility of a conflict of interest “does not 
itself preclude the representation,” and Comment 4 provides that the “critical questions are the likelihood that a conflict will eventuate and, if it does, whether it will materially interfere 
with the lawyer’s independent professional judgment in 
considering alternatives or foreclose courses of action that reasonably should be pursued on behalf of the client.” HRPC 
36
  
 
 
  
  
 
                         
 18  The questions are based on HRPC Rule 1.7 and comment 4 to Rule
1.7. These same questions are also appropriate under the current version of
HRPC Rule 1.7 and comment 8 to Rule 1.7. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Rule 1.7 cmt 4 (1994); see also Fragiao v. State, 95 Hawai ʻi 9, 
19, 18 P.3d 871, 881 (2001) (discussing HRPC Rule 1.7). 
Therefore, a circuit court’s “good cause” inquiry, 
when there is a potential conflict between the defendant and 
defense counsel’s personal interests, should address whether the representation would be “conducive to divided loyalties.” In 
light of the Hawai ʻi Rules of Professional Conduct’s guidance on 
conflicts of interest, the court should consider asking 
questions regarding the following: 
-the basis for the conflict of interest; 
-the potential that the conflict would materially 
interfere with defense counsel’s independent professional judgment in considering what actions to pursue on behalf of the client; 
-the possibility that the conflict might foreclose 
defense counsel from taking courses of action that reasonably should be pursued on behalf of a client; and 
-defense counsel’s opinion on whether his or her 
representation would be adversely affected.
18 
If the court finds that there is an actual or 
potential conflict of interest, the court has an obligation to 
37
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
disqualify the attorney or to explain the situation to the 
defendant and obtain a waiver if the defendant consents to the relationship. See United States v. Levy, 25 F.3d 146, 153 (2d 
Cir. 1994) (describing the court’s “disqualification/waiver” 
obligation for severe, minor, and potential conflicts); LaFave 
et al., supra,
 § 11.9(b). 
The circuit court in this case was required to conduct 
an inquiry into the potential conflict of interest that was apparent during the pre-trial hearings on August 13 and 14, 2012. While explaining her reasons in support of her motion to withdraw as counsel on August 13, Ickes emphasized that withdrawal was necessary for her professionally. Ickes noted, 
“If I feel like perhaps there might be some later allegations of me being ineffective, me neglecting her, I certainly need to protect myself.” 
She assured the court that her motion was not 
strategic or intended to waste the court’s time. 
Nonetheless, in the colloquy that followed between the 
circuit court and Ickes, the court did not ask any questions probative of whether a conflict of interest did in fact exist between Ickes and Harter, whether such a conflict would 
adversely affect Ickes’ performance, or whether Harter consented 
to the relationship. Similarly, the court did not ask Harter any questions related to Ickes’ potential conflict of interest. 
38
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Instead, the court determined that Ickes and Harter could “work 
together” and prepare for trial “in the little time” they had left because Ickes was “one of the better ones” and there were “only a few pages of discovery.” 
The following morning, the circuit court also did not 
address the question of whether Ickes had a conflict of interest with Harter, even though Harter explained that she left the courthouse quickly after the prior day’s hearing to go to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel. The circuit court did not inquire into the circumstances of the potential conflict. When Harter tried to explain why she did not meet with Ickes, the court responded, “I didn’t ask you why.” 
Although the circuit court did not inquire into Ickes’ 
potential conflict of interest, the record indicates that a conflict of interest existed. Ickes explained that her personal interest of protecting herself professionally would jeopardize Harter’s right to the effective assistance of counsel: “[F]or my professional stake in this, and for Ms. Harter’s well-being -- I mean, she is facing these criminal charges, and she is entitled to effective assistance of counsel.” Ickes emphasized that the 
potential of future allegations of ineffectiveness required her 
to protect herself, implicitly suggesting it could materially 
39
  
 
 
                          
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
affect her representation of Harter.19 The exchange between 
Ickes and the circuit court thus demonstrates that counsel 
believed her representation of Harter would be adversely affected by this conflict of interest. 
Ickes’ opinion regarding her ability to provide 
effective assistance of counsel should have been afforded significant consideration by the court because she was in the “best position” to determine whether her personal interest would interfere with the representation. See Holloway v. Arkansas, 
435 U.S. 475 (1978) (recognizing that an “attorney representing two defendants in a criminal matter is in the best position professionally and ethically to determine when a conflict of 
interest exists or will probably develop in the course of a 
trial”); cf. State v. Scott, 131 Hawai ʻi 333, 345, 319 P.3d 252, 
264 (2013) (finding that defense counsel was in the “best 
position to determine whether transcripts are necessary for an 
adequate defense”). 
In Holloway, the United States Supreme Court noted 
that defense attorneys have an obligation to advise the court of conflicts of interests, and as officers of the court, their declarations as to conflicts of interests are “virtually made 
19 Ickes stated, “If I feel like perhaps there might be some later
allegations of me being ineffective, me neglecting her, I certainly need to
protect myself.” 
40
  
 
 
                          
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
under oath.” 435 U.S. at 486. Here, Ickes expressly assured the 
court that her motion was not strategic or intended to waste the court’s time.
20 Thus, Ickes’ concerns, expressed as an officer 
of the court, regarding her ability to provide effective 
representation should have been accorded careful consideration 
by the circuit court in an inquiry to determine whether an actual conflict existed. 
In Douglas v. United States, 488 A.2d 121 (D.C. 1985), 
the D.C. Court of Appeals explained how a defense attorney’s personal interest interferes with representation under similar circumstances to this case. The defendant in Douglas
 filed a 
complaint against his defense counsel with the Bar Counsel’s 
Office, which led to the Bar Counsel launching an investigation 
into the defense attorney’s conduct. Id. at 127-28.21 The D.C. 
Court of Appeals noted that as soon as the defense counsel learned of the investigation of the defendant’s complaint, “he acquired a personal interest in the way he conducted appellant's 
20 Harter stated, “I . . . need to make this motion to withdraw and
assure the Court that it’s not any strategy on my part to try and, you know,
waste this Court’s time.” 
21 The defendant’s complaint did not come to light until the second
day of trial, when the defense counsel informed the court that he had just
received a letter from the Office of Bar Counsel notifying him of the
complaint and that the Bar Counsel was opening an inquiry into his conduct.Douglas v. United States, 488 A.2d 121, 128 (D.C. 1985). Even though thedefendant and defense counsel indicated to the court that they wanted to goforward with the trial, the trial court declared a mistrial sua sponte. Id.
at 129. 
41
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
defense—an interest independent of, and in some respects in 
conflict with, appellant’s interest in obtaining a judgment of acquittal.” Id. at 137. For example, given a fear that the 
complaint would be expanded to include claims of ineffective 
assistance of counsel at trial, the defense attorney “would have 
an inordinate interest in conducting the defense in a manner calculated to minimize any opportunity for post hoc  criticism of 
his efforts.” Id. at 137. 
Ickes was in a similar situation as the defense 
counsel in Douglas,  and she even went so far as to tell the 
circuit court directly that she needed to “protect” herself because of the possibility of a future ineffective assistance of 
counsel claim. This concern was confirmed the next day when 
Harter told the court that she went to the Office of Disciplinary Counsel following the pre-trial hearing. Ickes’ personal interest had the potential of seriously interfering with her “professional judgment about the best means of defending” Harter. 
Id. In light of the absence of a colloquy 
directed at ascertaining the risks, it cannot be discounted that defense counsel’s personal interest could potentially have also 
influenced her strategic decisions or encouraged her to use an 
overly “conservative trial strategy.” Id. Consequently, in the 
absence of any examination by the circuit court into the 
42
  
 
 
  
                         
  
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
underlying circumstances, the record in this case indicates 
there was a conflict of interest between Harter and Ickes. Therefore, “good cause” was demonstrated to grant the motion for withdrawal and substitution of counsel.
22 
b. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
Due to a Conflict of Interest 
We now consider whether the circuit court committed 
prejudicial error in denying Harter’s motion for substitution of 
counsel. Under article I, section 14 of the Hawai ʻi 
Constitution, a defense counsel’s representation is 
constitutionally ineffective where there is a relationship giving rise to a conflict of interest between the defense counsel and the client, and either the relationship adversely affected defense counsel’s performance, or the client did not 
consent to the relationship. Richie, 88 Hawai ʻi at 44, 960 P.2d 
at 1252.
23  
22 However, we note that “the filing, or the threat of filing, a
disciplinary complaint [does] not create a per se conflict of interest” to
establish good cause to substitute counsel. United States v. Rodriguez,  612
F.3d 1049, 1054 (8th Cir. 2010); see also Wayne R. LaFave et al., Criminal
Procedure § 11.9(b) (3d ed.) (“[W]here counsel moves to withdraw on the basisof an alleged conflict other than that presented by multiple representation(e.g., defendant’s filing of a disciplinary action against counsel), thecourt can more readily examine the underlying circumstances and refuse to
permit withdrawal on the ground that it does not present an actual
conflict.”). 
23 “Any demonstrable adverse effect on counsel’s performance is
sufficient; actual prejudice is not required.” Richie, 88 Hawai ʻi at 44, 960
P.2d at 1252. 
43
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
However, we recognize that a defendant should not be 
required to show “adverse effect” in all cases in which the 
claim involves the right to counsel. This court has presumed prejudice where the trial court denied a request to substitute 
counsel with privately retained counsel. 
State v. Cramer,  129 
Hawaiʻi 296, 303, 299 P.3d 756, 763 (2013). Relatedly, under the 
federal standard, “automatic reversal” is required where defense counsel is forced to represent codefendants over his or her 
timely objection, unless the trial court has determined that there is no conflict. Mickens v. Taylor, 535 U.S. 162, 168 
(2002). 
We note that a similar standard may also be warranted 
where defense counsel timely raises a conflict of interest based on a
 personal interest and the trial court fails to conduct any 
inquiry into the conflict. See Taylor v. State, 51 A.3d 655, 
669 (Md. 2012) (finding that the same concern for prejudice in multiple representation cases is present in “personal interest attorney conflict cases where the attorney has created an adversarial relationship with his client by initiating a civil suit against the client during the course of representation”); LaFave et al., supra, § 11.4(b) n.37 (noting that “automatic reversal” may be appropriate where counsel informs the trial court that continued representation would not meet the standard 
44
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of effective assistance because of a complete breakdown in 
communications). “The defendant’s right to the effective representation of counsel necessarily imposes upon the trial judge a corollary duty to protect that right whenever its 
enjoyment appears to be in doubt.” 
Kane, 52 Haw. at 487, 479 
P.2d at 209. 
Thus, where there is a conflict of interest, such as 
when the defendant or defense counsel raises a conflicting 
personal interest, the trial court’s failure to inquire into the conflict may amount to the deprivation of the defendant’s right to effective assistance of counsel. See Holloway, 435 U.S. at 
484 (holding that the trial judge’s failure “either to appoint 
separate counsel or to take adequate steps to ascertain whether 
the risk was too remote to warrant separate counsel” amounted to a deprivation “of the guarantee of ‘assistance of counsel’” where counsel raised concurrent conflict to the court). It would be impractical to require a defendant to prove “adverse 
effect” in such a case. 
See Cramer
, 129 Hawai ʻi at 303, 299 P.3d 
at 763 (“[I]t is impossible to know what different choices the 
rejected counsel would have made, and then to quantify the impact of those different choices on the outcome of the proceedings.” (quoting 
United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez , 548 U.S. 
140, 141 (2006)). Additionally, appellate inquiry “into a claim 
45
  
 
 
    
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of harmless error” may require “unguided speculation,” Holloway, 
435 U.S. at 491.24 
In this case, the circuit court was informed of a 
conflict of interest between counsel and the defendant, and the 
court did not conduct an inquiry into the conflict to support a 
finding that no actual conflict existed. Nonetheless, we need not decide whether a finding of prejudice is required in this case because the record demonstrates that the circuit court’s denial of the motion to substitute counsel resulted in a denial of effective assistance of counsel. Assistance is ineffective where there is “(1) a relationship giving rise to a conflict of interest . . . between defense counsel and his/her clients; and 
(2) either the relationship adversely affected defense counsel’s 
performance, or the client did not consent to the relationship.” 
State v. Mark, 123 Hawai ʻi 205, 234, 231 P.3d 478, 507 (2010) 
(alteration in original) (quoting  Richie,
 88 Hawai ʻi at 44, 960 
P.2d at 1252). As discussed, the record demonstrates a conflict 
of interest due to Ickes’ personal interest in the case, and the 
circuit court did not elicit any information to the contrary. 
24 The Supreme Court in Holloway noted that “[i]t may be possible in
some cases to identify from the record the prejudice resulting from an
attorney’s failure to undertake certain trial tasks, but even with a record
of the sentencing hearing available it would be difficult to judgeintelligently the impact of a conflict on the attorney’s representation of aclient.” Holloway, 435 U.S. at 490. “And to assess the impact of a conflict
of interest on the attorney’s options, tactics, and decisions in plea
negotiations would be virtually impossible.” Id. 
46
  
 
 
   Because we find the circuit court committed 
prejudicial error in denying Harter’s motion for withdrawal and 
substitution of counsel based on Ickes’ conflict of interest, it ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Harter did not voluntarily consent to the relationship 
as required under our conflict of interest standard. Mark, 123 
Hawaiʻi. at 234, 231 P.3d at 507. At the end of the August 14 
pretrial hearing, the circuit court gave Harter a choice between two options: “either . . . keep [Ickes],” or “proceed to trial this morning by yourself.” After Harter responded that she did not want to “go” by herself, the circuit court informed her that 
she was “then . . . obligated to talk to” Ickes. Thus, Harter 
was not given the opportunity to make an informed and knowledgeable decision to waive Ickes’ conflict of interest, but instead, she was forced to choose between proceeding pro se or accepting Ickes as counsel. See State v. Dicks, 57 Haw. 46, 49, 
549 P.2d 727, 730 (1976)(
“In determining the legal adequacy of 
waiver of counsel, the question is whether, considering the totality of the circumstances, the waiver was voluntarily and 
intelligently undertaken.”). 
Therefore, we hold the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying Harter’s motion for withdrawal and 
substitution of counsel. 
2.
 Grounds Related to Breakdown in Communication 
or Irreconcilable Difference 
47
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
is unnecessary to evaluate whether “good cause” existed due to a 
breakdown in the attorney-client relationship. However, in light of the frequency that this issue arises in our trial courts, we discuss the inquiry that applies under such 
circumstances. 
Substitution of counsel is commonly requested when 
there is a breakdown in communication or there is an 
irreconcilable difference between a defendant and his or her 
counsel. See State v. Kossman
, 101 Hawai ʻi 112, 120, 63 P.3d 
420, 428 (App. 2003) (citing Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi at 355, 916 P.2d 
at 1256). Good cause for substitution of counsel exists under 
such circumstances because the “attorney-client relationship involves the highest degree of trust and confidence.” Disciplinary Bd. of Haw. Sup. Ct. v. Kim, 59 Haw. 449, 453, 583 P.2d 333, 336 (1978); see also Morris v. Slappy, 461 U.S. 1, 24 (1983) (Brennan, J., concurring) (“[T]he attorney-client relationship . . . involves not just the casual assistance of a member of the bar, but an intimate process of consultation and 
planning which culminates in a state of trust and confidence 
between the client and his attorney. This is particularly essential, of course, when the attorney is defending the client’s life or liberty.”). 
48
  
 
 
   
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Before ruling on a motion to substitute counsel based 
upon a breakdown in communication or an irreconcilable 
difference, a trial court must conduct a “penetrating and comprehensive inquiry” into the nature of the relationship 
between the defendant and counsel. Soares
, 81 Hawai ʻi at 355, 
916 P.2d at 1256 (citing Kane, 52 Haw. at 487-88, 479 P.2d at 
209). This inquiry is not only required for the trial court to 
make an informed decision, but it also should seek to “ease the 
defendant’s dissatisfaction, distrust, and concern.” Adelzo-
Gonzalez, 268 F.3d at 777 (quoting Garcia, 924 F.2d at 926). 
Thus, when a motion to substitute counsel is based 
upon a breakdown in communication or an irreconcilable difference between counsel and client, the trial court “may need to evaluate the depth of any conflict between defendant and counsel, the extent of any breakdown in communication, how much 
time may be necessary for a new attorney to prepare, and any 
delay or inconvenience that may result from the substitution.” Id. 
For example, in this case, it is evident that the 
attorney-client relationship between Harter and Ickes was strained at the time Ickes sought to withdraw as Harter’s counsel during the initial hearing. 
Ickes informed the court 
that Harter was not satisfied with her as counsel and that 
49
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Harter did not trust her; Ickes also emphasized her inability to 
communicate with Harter. Ickes told the court that she had only one scheduled meeting with Harter, and that otherwise, she spoke with her on the phone or when at court. The tension between 
Harter and Ickes became even more evident during the hearing the 
following morning when Harter explained that she was unable to get in touch with Ickes “since the very beginning.” It also was noted that Harter was speaking with her “voice enraged” to Ickes outside the courtroom and that Ickes “was yelling” at Harter. 
Given the evident tension and breakdown in 
communication between Ickes and Harter, it would have been appropriate for the circuit court to inquire into the following 
areas: (1) the reasons behind the communication breakdown 
between Ickes and Harter; (2) why Ickes had not met with Harter in over five months despite multiple requests by Harter to schedule other meetings; and (3) the basis for Harter’s lack of trust and confidence in Ickes. Answers to these questions, which focus on the “status and quality of the attorney-client relationship,” would have significantly aided the circuit court in “evaluat[ing] the depth” of any difference between Ickes and 
50
  
 
 
   
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Harter and the “extent of any breakdown in communication” 
between them.25 See Adelzo-Gonzalez, 268 F.3d at 778-79. 
Here, the circuit court was overly focused on Ickes’ 
ability to provide adequate representation, which is problematic 
because even with the most competent counsel, a serious 
breakdown in the attorney-client relationship can result in a deficient defense. 
See id. at 778 (finding there was “too much 
emphasis on the appointed counsel’s ability to provide adequate representation”); United States v. Musa, 220 F.3d 1096, 1102 (9th Cir. 2000) (“Even if a defendant’s counsel is competent, a serious breakdown in communication can result in an inadequate defense.”). 
Once the court has gained information regarding the 
breakdown in the attorney-client relationship through such questioning, the court may then more accurately evaluate the extent of the conflict and determine whether there is any action that may be taken in an effort to repair the attorney-client relationship. 
Depending on the extent of the breakdown, the 
trial court, for example, may continue the motion for substitution of counsel to give the defense counsel and the 
defendant an opportunity to resolve their differences. Where 
25 After sentencing was completed, the circuit court granted Ickes’
motion to withdraw as counsel without Ickes stating any reason for the motion
other than that Harter wished to appeal. In the court’s Order AppointingCounsel, the court found “good cause” for the appointment of substitute
counsel. 
51
  
 
 
   Although we believe the communication and trust issues 
that had arisen between Harter and Ickes clearly required the 
court to conduct further inquiry, we need not resolve whether the circuit court erred in finding otherwise.
26 Instead, we 
emphasize that a trial court must conduct a “penetrating and comprehensive inquiry” into the status and quality of the attorney-client relationship before ruling on a motion to 
substitute counsel based on a breakdown in communication or an 
                         
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the defendant is concerned about the lack of time to prepare for 
trial or conduct a sufficient investigation, the court may consider continuing the scheduled trial or other pending proceeding to allow the defendant and defense counsel additional 
time for preparation. 
26 The law is unsettled as to the result of a trial court declining
to replace appointed counsel when there is a breakdown in communication. See 
LaFave et al., supra, § 11.4(b) (“Some courts have held that such an error
establishes a Sixth Amendment violation and requires reversal of the
conviction, absent a prosecution showing that the error was harmless. Others 
have held that a constitutional violation is established only if the
defendant can show prejudice, under the ineffective-assistance standard . . ..”). In a prior decision, the ICA held that a trial court’s denial of amotion to substitute counsel will not be overturned on appeal unless there isan abuse of discretion that prejudiced the defendant by amounting to an
unconstitutional denial of the right to effective assistance of counsel.
State v. Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi 332, 355, 916 P.2d 1233, 1256 (App. 1996),
overruled by State v. Janto, 92 Hawai ʻi 19, 986 P.2d 306 (1999). In using
this standard, the ICA in Soares cited solely to this court’s decision in
State v. Torres, 54 Hawai ʻi 502, 510 P.2d 494 (1973), which held that a denial
of a request for a continuance is not a per se denial of the right to counsel
but the appellate court should scrupulously review the record to determine
whether, under the circumstances, “there was an abuse of discretion that
prejudiced the defendant by amounting to an unconstitutional denial of the
right to effective assistance of counsel.” 54 Hawai ʻi at 505, 510 P.2d at
496. This standard was subsequently cited by the ICA in State v. Kossman,
101 Hawai ʻi 112, 63 P.3d 420, 427 (App. 2001). 
52
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
irreconcilable difference between the defendant and counsel. 
Such an inquiry should elicit information regarding the extent of the claimed breakdown in communication and the source and depth of the claimed irreconcilable difference. Adelzo-
Gonzalez
, 268 F.3d at 778-79. 
A trial court may consider the 
delay or inconvenience that would result from a substitution of counsel in addition to its consideration of the status and quality of the attorney-client relationship. 
B. Trial Court Duty to Sua Sponte Convene a Competency Hearing 
The second issue before the court is whether the 
circuit court abused its discretion in failing to sua sponte  
hold a hearing to determine Harter’s competence to stand trial. “It is a fundamental precept of the American system of justice that a ‘person whose mental condition is such that he or she lacks the capacity to understand the nature and object of the proceedings against him or her, to consult with counsel, and to assist in preparing his or her defense may not be subjected to a 
trial.’” Soares, 81 Hawai ʻi at 345, 916 P.2d at 1246 (App. 1996) 
(alterations omitted) (quoting Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162, 
171, 95 S. Ct. 896, 903 (1975)). Some have viewed this basic 
principle “as a by-product of the ban against trials in 
absentia” because “the mentally incompetent defendant, though physically present in the courtroom, is in reality afforded no 
53
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
opportunity to defend himself.” Drope, 420 U.S. at 171 (quoting 
Caleb Foote, 
A Comment on Pre-Trial Commitment of Criminal 
Defendants,  108 U. Pa. L. Rev. 832, 834 (1960)); Soares, 81 
Hawaiʻi at 345, 916 P.2d at 1246. 
HRS § 704-403 (1993) protects defendants accused of a 
criminal offense who lack the capacity to understand the 
proceedings against them or to assist in their defense. 
An 
initial procedural mechanism for providing this protection is through evaluations of defendants by qualified medical examiners whenever a defendant relies on the defense of physical or mental disease, there is “reason to doubt
 the defendant’s fitness,” or 
there is “ reason to believe that the physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect of the defendant will or has become an issue in the case.” HRS § 704-404(2) (Supp. 2012) (emphases added). 
Although HRS § 704-404 provides that the court 
may 
suspend the proceedings and appoint an examiner or panel of examiners once one of the triggering events occurs, a trial court “is duty bound to sua sponte convene a . . . hearing if it itself has or is presented with rational basis for believing that the physical or mental defect of a defendant will become an issue on the question of fitness or responsibility.” 
State v. 
Castro, 93 Hawai ʻi 454, 462, 5 P.3d 444, 452 (App.) (Acoba, J., 
concurring), adopted by
 93 Hawai ʻi 424, 426, 5 P.3d 414, 416 
54
  
 
 
   
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2000). This duty required by HRS § 704-404 satisfies the 
procedural due process protections of article I, section 5 of 
the Hawai ʻi Constitution, and the fourteenth amendment to the 
United States Constitution.27 Cf. Janto, 92 Hawai ʻi at 28, 986 
P.2d at 315 (noting that when a trial court makes a fitness 
determination under HRS § 704–403 it must also meet procedural due process requirements). 
Thus, when a trial court finds that there is “reason 
to doubt” a defendant’s fitness or “reason to believe” that the defendant’s mental or physical state will become an issue in the 
case, the court is required to suspend the proceedings and order 
an examination pursuant to HRS § 704-404. 
Castro, 93 Hawai ʻi at 
426, 5 P.3d at 416. The court’s “reason” “may come from the 
trial court’s own observations, known facts, evidence presented, 
motions, affidavits, or any other reasonable or credible sources.” Hobbs v. State, 359 S.W.3d 919, 924 (Tex. App. 2012). 
This may include evidence related to the defendant’s history, the defendant’s irrational and bizarre behavior, or the 
defendant’s demeanor in court. 
See Castro
, 93 Hawai ʻi at 427 
n.2, 5 P.3d at 417 n.2 (finding “reason to doubt” the 
27 The fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution provide in relevant part that
no person shall be deprived of “life, liberty, or property without due
process of law.” 
55
  
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
defendant’s fitness to proceed and “reason to believe” he was 
suffering from a disease, disorder, or defect that affected his ability to assist in his own defense based on the defendant’s history and behavior); 
United States v. Marks,  530 F.3d 799, 814 
(9th Cir. 2008) (noting that under the federal standard it is appropriate to consider “the defendant’s irrational behavior, his demeanor in court, and any prior medical opinions on his [or her] competence”). 
During the proceedings in this case, Harter’s 
recounting of past events and her current status was sometimes disjointed and bizarre. 
While describing her employment as a 
“dancer and a hostess” at a nightclub, Harter stated she was 
starting a “modeling agency” for charity “with them as [her] 
sponsor.” She testified that the police officer who spoke to her outside of Club 939 was a “very short,” “old man” who had “gray hair and a mustache” despite none of the officers testifying that such a person existed. Harter also testified she had “shrunk” after the incident, possibly because her muscles were “contracted instead of relaxed.” Harter stated that being “touched” by the bouncer caused her “extreme” pain 
because she “hadn’t been touched for about six months because 
[she] had just gotten out of [an] engagement” despite the fact 
56
  
 
 
   
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that she also said she was living with her “boyfriend” at the 
time. 
Harter’s mental state appeared to have substantially 
deteriorated by the time of the sentencing hearing. During the 
sentencing hearing, Ickes stated to the court that she thought 
Harter would respond well to “a probationary period and perhaps even with a special condition that she obtain and complete mental health treatment.” 
Further, Harter seemed delusional when speaking with 
the court. For example, she informed the court, “I used to have like $20 million, and I just lost my family and my fiancé. And during this, I had lost three businesses, I believe, because I 
had to stop and participate in the case.” Harter claimed that 
her case was really a case of mistaken identity, and she asserted there was a statement by her boyfriend’s dad, a Supreme Court justice, supporting her claim of mistaken identity. Harter claimed that she spoke to the FBI about her case and that she had gone to speak to her friend, the commander of Pearl Harbor.
28 Harter conveyed that she was terrified that something 
bad was going to happen to her throughout the proceedings 
because the district court judge at the first preliminary 
28 This may have been an attempt to explain how Harter got arrested
on Hickam Air Force Base one month after her trial. 
57
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
hearing had “screamed over everybody that was in the court and 
said, I’m going to fry you, da, da, da. I’m pushing it to the limit. You’re going to be in jail for three years, da, da, da.” 
Given Harter’s bizarre statements at sentencing, the 
record was clear that there was “reason to doubt” Harter’s fitness during the sentencing proceedings, and the circuit court should have suspended the proceedings and appointed an examiner to evaluate Harter pursuant to HRS § 704-404. 
In Janto, this 
court held that the correct standard of review of a trial court’s determination of fitness is abuse of discretion. 
See 
Janto, 92 Hawai ʻi at 28, 986 P.2d at 315.
 Similarly, an abuse of 
discretion standard should apply in reviewing a trial court’s decision not to sua sponte order a fitness examination of a defendant under HRS § 704-404. Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude the circuit court abused its discretion in not 
ordering a fitness 
examination.29 
In its Memorandum Opinion, the ICA noted that Harter’s 
counsel never raised a mental impairment issue to the court. We 
recognize that “judges must depend to some extent on counsel” to 
29 No pre-sentence report was required by the circuit court prior to
sentencing. HRS § 706-601 allows courts the discretion to order pre-sentence
reports for persons over the age of twenty-two years old who are convicted ofmisdemeanor offences. HRS § 706-601 (1) & (2) (Supp. 1997). Had the court requested a pre-sentence report, the court would have received a report onHarter’s physical and mental condition, which likely would have more fully
informed the court’s sentencing decision. HRS § 706-602(1)(b) (Supp. 2012). 
58
  
 
 
    
  
                         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
raise questions of fitness. Castro, 93 Hawai ʻi at 462, 5 P.3d at 
452 (Acoba, J., concurring) (quoting Drope, 420 U.S. at 176-77). 
This is consistent with the expectation that defense counsel is responsible for raising his or her good faith doubts regarding the defendant’s 
fitness.30 
Nevertheless, any expectation that defense counsel 
will raise fitness issues is separate from the requirement that 
HRS § 704-404 imposes on trial courts. Consequently, when the 
trial court’s own observations or other indicators present the court with a “reason to doubt” the defendant’s fitness, the court is required to order an examination irrespective of whether defense counsel raises the issue. The duty placed on a trial court to 
sua sponte order an examination under HRS § 704­
404 ensures the court’s compliance with due process obligations and also serves the public interest. “In the most egregious of 
circumstances, a mentally ill defendant who otherwise should 
have been subjected to examination and treatment may remain untreated in prison and upon his or her release, present a 
further or greater risk to public safety.” Castro, 93 Hawai ʻi at 
30 Defense counsel should move for evaluation of the defendant’s 
competence when he or she has a good faith doubt regarding defendant’s
competence to stand trial and “should make known to the court and theprosecutor those facts known to counsel which raise the good faith doubt ofcompetence.” 
See ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Mental Health, Mental
Retardation, and Criminal Justice: General Professional Obligations, Standard
7.4.2(c) (1989). 
59
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
462, 5 P.3d at 452 (citing HRS §§ 704-404 and 704-406(1)). We 
therefore emphasize that, while HRS § 704-404 does not affirmatively require a trial court to investigate the competency of a defendant, it does require a court to consider 
indicators of a defendant’s unfitness that are before the court. 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s February 27, 2014 
Judgment on Appeal and the circuit court’s October 11, 2012 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence are vacated. This case is 
remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings . 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
for petitioner 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
James M. Anderson 
for respondent 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
60
 