*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I,  
Petitioner and Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs.  
 
TIANA F.M. SAGAPOLUTELE-SILVA,  
Respondent and Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee.  
 
 
SCWC-19-0000491 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
(CAAP-19-0000491; CASE NO. 1DTA-18-01227) 
JUNE 3, 2022  
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, J., 
AND CIRCUIT JUDGE WONG, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY, WITH 
McKENNA, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY, WITH WHOM WILSON, J., JOINS,
AND WILSON, J., DISSENTING SEPARATELY 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.  
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Tiana Sagapolutele-Silva was arrested after a traffic 
stop in 2018 and charged with Operating a Vehicle Under the 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) and excessive speeding.  Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-19-0000491
03-JUN-2022
09:33 AM
Dkt. 23 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
2 
 Sagapolutele-Silva moved to suppress any statements she made 
during the traffic stop on the ground that she was not advised of her Miranda  rights during the encounter.  The district court 
granted the motion, concluding that Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody during the investigation for OVUII because the 
investigating officers had probable cause to arrest her for 
excessive speeding, a petty misdemeanor.  The Intermediate Court 
of Appeals (ICA) affirmed. 1
On appeal, the State asks us to clarify when a suspect 
is in custody for purposes of administering the prophylactic 
warnings against self-incrimination required by article I, 
section 10 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitu tion.  Although our cases have 
consistently stated that the custody test is one of totality of 
the circumstances, some of our precedent has nonetheless 
indicated that the presence of probable cause alone is 
dispositive.   
  We hereby clarify that a court must evaluate the totality of the circumstances to determine whether a suspect is 
in custody such that Miranda warnings are required before a 
police officer may interrogate them.  That formulation is consistent with the purposes of Miranda since it focuses the 
inquiry on whether police have created a “coercive atmosphere.”  
                     
1  Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
3 
 See, e.g., State v. Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 482, 643 P.2d 541, 544 
(1982) (Miranda warnings are required when “the totality of 
circumstances created the kind of coercive atmosphere that 
Miranda warnings were designed to prevent”); State v. Wyatt, 67 
Haw. 293, 299, 687 P.2d 544, 549 (1984) (“the ultimate test is whether the questioning was of a nature that would subjugate the 
individual to the will of his examiner and thereby undermine the 
privilege against compulsory self-incrimination” (citations 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted)).   
Almost forty years ago, we considered the coerciveness 
of roadside questioning in Wyatt.  The defendant there was 
ordered to pull over after officers observed her driving at 
night with no headlights on, and officers then smelled alcohol 
emanating from her vehicle.  We held that Miranda warnings were 
not required at that point since the circumstances were not intimidating or coercive, but rather constituted “on-the-scene 
questioning of brief duration conducted prior to arrest in 
public view.”  Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 300, 687 P.2d at 550; see also 
State v. Kuba, 68 Haw. 184, 188, 706 P.2d 1305, 1309 (1985) 
(holding, under facts “almost indistinguishable” from Wyatt, 
that Miranda warnings were not required before the police began 
asking questions).  Wyatt and Kuba have not been overruled and 
their totality-of-the-circumstances approach should be applied *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
4 
 here.  Accordingly, probable cause is relevant but not 
dispositive to determining whether a person is in custody.   
This case illustrates why it is important to assess 
the relevance of probable cause in light of all the circumstances.  Sagapolutele-Silva was observed driving at 
thirty-two miles per hour over the speed limit; if she had been 
driving just three miles per hour slower, the officer would not 
have had probable cause to arrest her for the offense of 
excessive speeding.  
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-
105(a)(1) (2007).2  That three-mile-per-hour difference had no 
effect on the coerciveness of the situation from Sagapolutele-
Silva’s point of view.  Under the totality of the circumstances, 
Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody when she was pulled over or during the administration of the standardized field sobriety 
test (SFST).  Accordingly, Miranda warnings were not required, 
and there was no illegality which would taint her subsequent statements as fruit of the poisonous tree.    
We therefore vacate the district court’s order 
suppressing Sagapolutele-Silva’s statements, vacate the judgment 
of the ICA affirming that Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody 
during the traffic stop, and remand the case to the district 
court for further proceedings. 
                     
2  See infra note 5. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
5 
 II.
 BACKGROUND 
  Sagapolutele-Silva was arrested after a traffic stop 
on March 31, 2018.  She was charged in the District Court of the 
First Circuit3 with one count of OVUII, in violation of HRS 
§§ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) (Supp. 2015),4 and one count of 
excessive speeding, in violation of HRS § 291C-105(a)(1) (2007).5   
  Sagapolutele-Silva moved to suppress any statements she made during the traffic stop on the ground that she was not 
advised of her Miranda rights during the encounter.  At the 
hearing on the motion, the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officers involved in the traffic stop, Officers Franchot Termeteet and Bobby Ilae, testified.  Officer Termeteet 
testified to pulling over Sagapolutele-Silva after observing her 
driving seventy-seven miles per hour in an area where the speed 
                     
3  The Honorable Summer M. M. Kupau-Odo presided.  
 
4  Sagapolutele- Silva was charged with violating HRS §§ 291E-
61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) (Supp. 2015), which provide: 
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates 
or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair the person’s normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard 
against casualty; [or] . . . . 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred 
ten liters of breath[.] 
 
5  Sagapolutele- Silva was charged with violating HRS § 291C-
105(a)(1) (2007), which provides: “No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a 
speed exceeding[] [t]he applicable state or county speed limit by thirty miles per hour or more[.]” HRS § 291C- 105(c) provides that “[a]ny person who 
violates this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.” 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
6 
 limit was 
forty-five miles per hour, and drifting between lanes 
without signaling on the H-1 freeway in Honolulu.  On cross-
examination, Officer Termeteet testified that based on his 
observations of her speeding, he had probable cause to arrest 
Sagapolutele-Silva for excessive speeding and that after being 
stopped, she was not free to leave.   
  Officer Termeteet informed Sagapolutele-Silva “that I 
was stopping her for speeding”; in response, she acknowledged 
that she had been speeding.  Officer Termeteet testified that he 
smelled “a strong odor of alcohol coming from within the 
vehicle,” but he could not determine from whom the odor emanated because there were four passengers in the car.  He asked 
Sagapolutele-Silva for her license, vehicle registration, and 
proof of insurance.  She produced a permit for a commercial 
driver’s license, and explained that she had a regular license 
but did not have it with her; she also provided him with a 
safety-inspection card.  Officer Termeteet observed that 
Sagapolutele-Silva had red, watery, and glassy eyes.  Officer Termeteet asked Sagapolutele-Silva if she would participate in 
the SFST; she agreed to do so.   
  Officer Ilae testified that he was “covering Officer 
Termeteet on a traffic stop” and administered the SFST to *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
7 
 Sagapolutele-Silva.   After asking her again whether she would be 
willing to participate in the SFST, he asked a series of 
“preliminary questions” sometimes referred to as the medical 
rule-out questions: (1) “[d]o you have any physical defects or 
speech impediments,” (2) “are you taking medication,” (3) “are 
you under the care of a doctor or dentist,” (4) “are you under 
the care of an eye doctor,” (5) “are you epileptic or diabetic,” 
(6) “[do you have an] artificial or glass eye,” (7) “are you 
wearing any contact lenses or corrective lenses,” and (8) “are 
[you] blind in any eye.”  Officer Ilae testified that these 
questions are asked “to help [him] gauge whether or not the impairment [he is] seeing is medically related or if . . . 
there’s a medical emergency.”  He testified he would not 
administer the SFST if there were a medical emergency, but if 
someone did not want to answer the medical rule-out questions, 
he would nonetheless continue with the test.  On cross-
examination, however, he testified he had never in fact 
administered the SFST without asking the medical rule-out questions. 6
  Officer Ilae then administered the SFST.  He instructed Sagapolutele-Silva on each of the three components – 
the horizontal gaze nystagmus, the walk-and-turn, and the one-
                     
6  The record does not reflect when Officer Ilae arrived on the 
scene.  On cross- examination, Officer Ilae testified that Sagapolutele- Silva 
was already out of the car when he got there.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
8 
 leg stand – to which she replied that she understood and had no 
questions.  After completing the SFST and giving Sagapolutele-Silva a preliminary alcohol screening, Officer Ilae then told 
her “that she was over” and was being arrested.  As Officer Ilae 
walked back to his car with Sagapolutele-Silva following him, he 
heard her state that “she’s not going to lie, she had a few 
beers but her friends [were] more impaired than she was.”   
 
 The district court orally granted the motion to 
suppress, concluding that Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody and subject to interrogation because Officer Termeteet had probable 
cause to arrest her when he pulled her over.  In its written order, the district court made, as relevant here, the following 
findings of fact and conclusions of law:  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
. . . 
2.
  Officer Termeteet . . . measure[d] Defendant’s speed at 
77 miles per hour in a 45 mile per hour zone. 
 
. . . 
 
5.
  While following Defendant’s vehicle, Officer Termeteet 
observed Defendant drift into lane number 1, completing 
a lane change without signals and then drift from lane 1 back to lane 2, completing another lane change without 
signals. 
 
6.  Officer Termeteet activated his blue flashing lights 
and Defendant’s vehicle came to a complete stop in the 
right shoulder lane. 
 
7.  Officer Termeteet approached Defendant’s driver’s side 
window and noticed the odor of alcohol coming from her breath. . . . [and] from within the vehicle. . . . 
 8.  Officer Termeteet asked Defendant for her driver’s 
license. . . .  Officer Termeteet asked Defendant if she *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
9 
 would be willing to participate in a [SFST].  Defendant 
verbally consented to participate in the SFST.  
Defendant exited her vehicle and HPD Officer [ Ilae] took 
over the investigation. 
 
9.  When Officer Ilae arrived on scene, Officer Termeteet 
apprised him of his observations.  Officer Ilae approached Defendant’s vehicle and began conversing with 
her.  Officer Ilae asked Defendant if she would be 
willing to participate in an SFST.  Defendant verbally consented to participate in the SFST. . . . 
 10. Defendant was not free to leave while she waited for 
Officer Ilae to arrive. 
 11. Prior to Defendant exiting the vehicle, she was not 
free to leave. 
 
12. Defendant was the focus of an OVUII investigation. 
 
13. Officer Termeteet had probable cause to arrest or cite 
Defendant for the petty misdemeanor offense of Excessive Speeding as soon as he stopped her vehicle. 
 . . . 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
. . . 
7.  At the time 
that Defendant was sitting in her vehicle, 
prior to the administration of the SFST, she was not free to leave, she was the focus of an OVUII 
investigation and officers had probable cause to arrest [her] for at least Excessive Speeding.  Officer[s] 
Termeteet and Ilae did not need the results of the SFST 
to arrest and/or cite Defendant for Excessive Speeding.  
Legal custody had attached. 
 
(Footnotes omitted.)  
  The district court concluded that both the officers’ 
initial questions, asking if Sagapolutele-Silva would consent to 
the SFST, and the medical rule-out questions, asking whether she 
understood the instructions, were interrogation; accordingly, 
Sagapolutele-Silva’s answers to those questions were suppressed.  
The district court also suppressed all evidence obtained 
thereafter as fruit of the poisonous tree.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
10 
  
 The State appealed the order granting the motion to 
suppress, and the ICA affirmed in part and vacated in part in a 
published opinion.  State v. Sagapolutele-Silva, 147 Hawaiʻ i 92, 
104, 464 P.3d 880, 892 (App. 2020).  As relevant here, the ICA 
concluded that Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody for excessive 
speeding “[u]nder the totality of the circumstances” because Officer Termeteet had probable cause to arrest her for that 
offense when she was initially stopped.  Id. at 100, 464 P.3d at 
888.  The ICA held, additionally, that “due to Sagapolutele-Silva being in custody for Excessive Speeding, the medical rule-
out questions, which were asked in relation to the OVUII 
investigation here, constituted interrogation.”
7   Id. at 101, 
464 P.3d at 889.  The ICA further reasoned that although “the 
investigation for OVUII in this case constituted a separate and 
distinct investigation” from the investigation for excessive 
speeding, and Officer Termeteet only had reasonable suspicion of 
OVUII, “the failure to provide a Miranda warning when required 
for one crime will taint a subsequent interrogation even if the 
                     
7  With respect to interrogation, the ICA affirmed the district 
court’s conclusion that the medical rule- out questions were interrogation, 
and held that the defendant’s answers to those questions were properly 
suppressed.  State v. Sagapolutele- Silva, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 102, 464 P.3d at 890.  
Additionally, the ICA held that the defendant’s spontaneous post- arrest 
statement that she had drunk a few beers was properly suppressed as fruit of 
the poisonous tree.  Id. at 104, 464 P.3d at 892.  However, the ICA held that 
statements made in response to being told why she was stopped were not the product of interrogation.  Id. at 103, 464 P.3d at 891.  For a discussion of  
interrogation during an OVUII roadside investigation, see State v. Skapinok, 
SCWC-19-0000476 (Haw. 2022). 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
11 
 interrogation relates to a different crime for which Miranda 
warnings were not yet required, if a defendant is still in 
custody.”  Id. at 100-01, 464 P.3d at 888-89. 
  The State and Sagapolutele-Silva filed applications for writs of certiorari, both of which this court accepted.  The 
State asks us to revisit our precedent establishing an 
“either/or” test in which the existence of probable cause, 
standing alone, is enough to establish that a suspect was in 
custody.
8  Sagapolutele-Silva agrees that “the fact of probable 
cause for arrest is not determinative on the issue of ‘custody’ for the purposes of Miranda — the determination as to whether an 
individual is in ‘custody’ requires an objective determination 
of the totality of the circumstances.”  But Sagapolutele-Silva 
contends that the ICA erred by holding that she was not in 
custody during the “separate and distinct” investigation for 
OVUII.9     
                     
8  The State’s application notes that the “either/or” rule, 
established in State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i 107, 126, 34 P.3d 1006, 1025 
(2001), “is at variance with” Wyatt’s “totality of circumstances” rule and 
internally inconsistent with other parts of Ketchum.  The State “asks this 
Court to clarify that custody for Miranda purposes should be based on a 
totality of the circumstances and overrule any cases to the extent that they 
suggest otherwise.”   
   
9  The application suggests that because of this framing, the ICA 
held Sagapolutele- Silva “was therefore not subjected to ‘custodial 
interrogation.’”  To the contrary, the ICA agreed that she was in custody, citing, in part, the existence of probable cause to arrest for excessive 
speeding, which “taint[ed]” the OVUII investigation.  Sagapolutele- Silva, 147 
Hawaiʻi at 101, 464 P.3d at 889.   
Sagapolutele- Silva’s application additionally challenges the 
ICA’s holding that only some of the questions asked during the encounter were 
(continued...) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
12 
 III.
  STANDARD OF REVIEW 
  “An appellate court reviews a ruling on a motion to 
suppress de novo to determine whether the ruling was ‘right’ or 
‘wrong.’”  State v. Weldon, 144 Hawaiʻi 522, 530, 445 P.3d 103, 
111 (2019) (quoting State v. Tominiko, 126 Hawaiʻi 68, 75, 266 
P.3d 1122, 1129 (2011)). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The self-incrimination clause of article I, section 10 
of the Hawai‘ i Constitution10 ensures that “a police officer may 
not undermine a person’s privilege against compelled self-incrimination by subjugating his or her will to that of 
examining police officer.”  State v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻ i
 207, 210, 
10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000).  This privilege “provides us with some 
of our most treasured protections — preservation of our 
autonomy, privacy, and dignity against the threat of state 
action.”  State v. Kamana‘ o, 103 Hawai‘ i 315, 320, 82 P.3d 401, 
406 (2003) (quoting State v. Reyes, 93 Hawai‘ i 321, 329, 2 P.3d 
725, 733 (App. 2000)).  In order to safeguard this right, before 
police can interrogate a suspect in custody, “the person must be 
                                                                  
(continued . . .) 
interrogation and its failure to address fruits of the poisonous tree 
argument.  For the reasons discussed below, we need not reach these issues 
based on our resolution of this case.  
 
10  Article 1, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution states in 
pertinent part that no person “shall ... be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against oneself.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
13 
 warned that he has a right to remain silent, that any statement 
he does make may be used as evidence against him, and that he has a right to the presence of an attorney, either retained or 
appointed.”  Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444 (1966); id. 
at 455 (“Even without employing brutality, . . . the very fact of custodial interrogation exacts a heavy toll on individual 
liberty and trades on the weakness of individuals.”).  
Miranda warnings are also mandated under the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution, State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 265–66, 492 P.2d 
657, 664 (1971) (“We hold today that the protections which the United States Supreme Court enumerated in Miranda have an 
independent source in the Hawai[ʿ]i Constitution’s privilege 
against self-incrimination.”), and we have provided broader 
protections under our constitution than exist under the United 
States Constitution, id. at 263, 266, 492 P.2d at 662, 664 
(rejecting Harris v. New York, 401 U.S. 222 (1971), and holding 
that defendant who testifies cannot be impeached with statements 
obtained in violation of Miranda).   
The threshold question for a Miranda analysis is 
whether the defendant was subjected to “custodial interrogation,” defined as “questioning initiated by law 
enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody 
or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any 
significant way.”  Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 543 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
14 
 (quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444).  Here, the district court 
and ICA held that Sagapolutele-Silva was both (1) in custody and 
(2) interrogated, and therefore, Miranda warnings were required.  
For the following reasons, we disagree with the first conclusion.  
A. Although Our Cases Emphasize That the Relevant Inquiry is 
the Totality of the Circumstances, Some Decisions Have 
Suggested That the Existence of Probable Cause is 
Determinative   
  As noted above, both parties agree that the existence 
of probable cause should not be outcome determinative when 
analyzing whether a suspect is in custody for purposes of 
Miranda.  But when the ICA homed in on whether probable cause 
had developed in this case, it did so because, although this 
court has repeatedly stated that the test turns on the totality 
of the circumstances, some of our precedent also suggests that 
probable cause, standing alone, is enough to establish a suspect 
was in custody: 
[W]e hold that a person is “in custody” for purposes of 
article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution if an 
objective assessment of the totality of the circumstances 
reflects 
either (1) that the person has become impliedly 
accused of committing a crime because the questions of the 
police have become sustained and coercive, such that they 
are no longer reasonably designed briefly to confirm or 
dispel their reasonable suspicion or (2) that the point of 
arrest has arrived because either (a) probable cause to 
arrest has developed or (b) the police have subjected the 
person to an unlawful “de facto” arrest without probable cause to do so. 
 
State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i 107, 126, 34 P.3d 1006, 1025 (2001) 
(emphases added). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
15 
   We take this opportunity to clarify.  To determine 
whether a suspect is in custody for Miranda purposes under 
article I, section 10 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution, a court must 
consider the totality of the circumstances, objectively 
appraised.  The relevant circumstances are those that “betoken[] 
a significant deprivation of freedom, ‘such that an innocent person could reasonably have believed that he or she was not 
free to go and that he or she was being taken into custody 
indefinitely.’”  Id. at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024 (alterations 
omitted) (quoting Kraus v. County of Pierce, 793 F.2d 1105, 1109 
(9th Cir. 1986)).  While the existence of probable cause is 
relevant, it is not dispositive in every case.    
1. Our cases have never abrogated the totality-of-the-
circumstances inquiry, although they recognize the 
relevance of probable cause to arrest   
Our cases have consistently emphasized that the 
totality of the circumstances should be evaluated in determining 
when a person is in custody for Miranda purposes.  They have 
also consistently noted that the existence of probable cause to arrest is relevant to that analysis.  Although Ketchum indicated 
that the existence of probable cause is determinative of 
custody, it never abrogated the totality-of-the-circumstances 
test – to the contrary, it explicitly affirmed it.  Moreover, 
far from overruling cases like Wyatt and Kuba, which applied the 
test to traffic stops, Ketchum cited them in support.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
16 
   Fifty years ago, in State v. Kalai, police went to the 
defendant’s home to ask what he knew about a shooting that had 
occurred two days prior.  56 Haw. 366, 369, 537 P.2d 8, 11 
(1975).  We noted that: 
What constitutes custodial interrogation outside of the 
police station, however, necessarily depends upon the circumstances of the particular case; and whether the 
compulsive factors with which Miranda was concerned are 
present must be determined from the totality of the 
circumstances.  One important factor is the degree to which 
the investigation has focused upon a specific individual, 
for once a particular individual becomes a prime suspect, 
he must be advised of his constitutional rights before any 
attempt is made to interrogate him. 
 
Id. (citations omitted). 
  We observed that the investigation had not yet “zeroed 
in” on the defendant, that the defendant voluntarily let the 
officers into his home, spoke with them freely, and that “[n]o 
questions were asked which might have been calculated to elicit 
admissions placing him at the scene” or linking him to the 
weapon that was used.  Id. at 370, 537 P.2d at 12.  Considering 
all the circumstances, we concluded that defendant was not in custody. 
  Even after the United States Supreme Court held the 
following year, in Beckwith v. United States, 425 U.S. 341, 347 
(1976), that whether or not the defendant is the “focus” of the investigation is immaterial,
11 this court continued to recognize 
                     
11  The Court held that the relevant question is whether the 
defendant was subjected to a “custodial situation,” and noted that it is “the 
(continued...) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
17 
 that the focus of the investigation is a significant factor.  
See, e.g., Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544; State v. 
Patterson, 59 Haw. 357, 361, 581 P.2d 752, 755 (1978).  In 
Patterson, police responding to a report of a burglary in 
progress at 3 a.m. briefly questioned the defendant outside of a 
home; we held that Miranda warnings were not required.  Citing 
Beckwith, 425 U.S. at 347, we noted that the “focus of the 
investigation upon the defendant, standing alone, will not 
trigger the application of the Miranda rule,” but acknowledged 
that it continued to be an “important factor.”  Patterson, 59 
Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at 755.  We emphasized that the test requires consideration of the totality of the circumstances, 
including probable cause:  
Where the police, prior to questioning the individual, are 
in possession of facts sufficient to effect an arrest 
without a warrant based on probable cause, it is less 
likely that the person confronted would be allowed to come 
and go as he pleases.  The degree of this likelihood may, of course, depend upon the nature and gravity of the 
offense, as well as other circumstances.  In any event, 
whether the defendant was in custody or otherwise deprived 
of his freedom of action for Miranda purposes is to be 
determined from the totality of the circumstances, 
objectively appraised.  These would include the place and 
time of the interrogation, the length of the interrogation, 
the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of the 
police, and all other relevant circumstances.  
 
Id. (emphasis added) (citations omitted).   
                                                                  
(continued . . .) 
compulsive aspect of custodial interrogation, and not the strength or content of the government’s suspicions at the time the questioning was conducted,” 
that determines whether Miranda warnings are required.  Beckwith, 426 U.S. at 
346-347 (quoting United States v. Caiello, 420 F.2d 471, 473 (2d Cir. 1969)). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
18 
 Patterson thus indicated that probable cause was 
suggestive of custody – a circumstance that might serve as an 
indicator that the point of arrest has arrived.12   
Following Patterson, this court continued to hold that 
“[p]robable cause to arrest is . . . not determinative, but it 
may play a significant role in the application of the Miranda 
rule.”  Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544.13  In Melemai, 
the police were investigating a hit and run in which a jogger 
was struck by a pickup truck.  Id. at 480, 643 P.2d at 543.  The 
license plate of the vehicle involved in the accident was registered to the defendant.  Police went to the defendant’s home, and the defendant arrived in a vehicle matching the 
                     
12  Justice Wilson suggests that Patterson adopted a bright- line rule 
regarding the significance of probable cause.  Dissent at 3- 4.  However, 
respectfully, he fails to consider the context surrounding the passage he 
quotes, which suggests to the contrary that all of the circumstances must be considered: 
  
No precise line can be drawn because each case must 
necessarily turn upon its own facts and circumstances, but 
we think that the California court in People v. Manis, 268 
Cal.App.2d 653, 669, 74 Cal.Rptr. 423, 433 (1969) came as 
close as any to delineating, generally, the outer 
parameters beyond which on- the-scene interviews may not 
proceed without the Miranda warnings: 
“(P)ersons temporarily detained for brief questioning 
by police officers who lack probable cause to make an 
arrest or bring an accusation need not be warned 
about incrimination and their right to counsel, until 
such time as the point of arrest or accusation has 
been reached or the questioning has ceased to be brief and casual and become sustained and coercive.” 
 
Patterson, 59 Haw. at 362-63, 581 P.2d at 755- 56 (emphasis added).   
 
13  In Melemai, we held that two factors — whether the investigation 
had focused on the defendant and whether probable cause existed — “may play a 
significant role in the application of the Miranda rule.”  64 Haw. at 481, 
643 P.2d at 544.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
19 
 description given by a witness to the accident.  Officers asked 
the defendant to exit his vehicle and for his driver’s license.  When the defendant complied, they asked him “if he had hit 
anyone with his car, and defendant answered in the affirmative.”  
Id.  The police officers then asked why the defendant had left 
the scene, and the defendant answered.  Id.  
We held that the defendant’s admission that he hit the 
jogger gave the police probable cause.  “Inasmuch as the totality of circumstances created the kind of coercive 
atmosphere that Miranda warnings were designed to prevent, 
custody attached and Miranda warnings were required.  Based upon 
our analysis, the defendant’s answer to the first question was admissible while his answer to the second was not.”  Id. at 482, 
643 P.2d at 544.    
We later revisited this issue in Ah Loo.  The 
defendant there was observed by police holding a beer while he stood with a group of people; when officers “detained the group” 
and asked the defendant his name, age, and residential address, 
he admitted he was underage.  94 Hawai‘ i at 209, 10 P.3d at 730.  
We held that a defendant is not in custody if, during a 
“temporary investigative detention,” the police officer “poses 
noncoercive questions to the detained person that are designed 
to confirm or dispel the officer’s reasonable suspicion.”  Id. 
at 211, 10 P.3d at 732.  In other words, we clarified that “an *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
20 
 individual may very well be ‘seized’” pursuant to search and 
seizure doctrine “and yet not be ‘in custody,’ such that Miranda warnings are required as a precondition to any questioning.”  
Id.  This court cited the rule from Melemai that “if neither 
probable cause to arrest nor sustained and coercive 
interrogation are present, then questions posed by the police do 
not rise to the level of ‘custodial interrogation’ requiring 
Miranda warnings.”  Ah Loo, 94 
Hawaiʻi at 210, 10 P.3d at 731.  
In a parenthetical, we cited Melemai for the proposition that 
“‘custody’ did not occur until after defendant’s admission of 
culpability — uttered in response to [the] police officer’s 
question — gave [the] officer probable cause to arrest.”  Id. at 
211, 10 P.3d at 732. 
Accordingly, citing Melemai, we formulated the rule as 
follows:  
[I]f the detained person’s responses to a police officer’s 
questions provide the officer with probable cause to arrest 
or, alternatively, if officer’s questions become sustained 
and coercive (such that the officer’s questions are no 
longer reasonably designed to briefly confirm or dispel his 
or her reasonable suspicion), the officer is — at that time 
— required to inform the detained person of his or her 
constitutional rights against self- incrimination and to 
counsel, as mandated by Miranda and its progeny. 
 
Id. at 212, 10 P.3d at 733 (first emphasis added). 
Thus, up to and including our decision in Ah Loo, our 
cases did not indicate that the existence of probable cause 
alone was dispositive.  Rather, it was a factor to be considered 
in light of all the circumstances.  Where probable cause *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
21 
 developed during the course of the officer’s questioning of the 
defendant — such as when the defendant admitted hitting a jogger in Melemai — custody would attach.   
That approach makes sense, since the questions and 
responses would factor into assessing the coerciveness of the 
situation from the defendant’s point of view.  In Melemai, 
probable cause developed at the scene, in the presence of the defendant, when the defendant answered affirmatively to the 
officer’s question “if he had hit anyone with his car.”  64 Haw. 
at 480, 643 P.2d at 543.  That question and the defendant’s 
answer contributed to a coercive atmosphere of which the defendant was aware.  Id. at 482, 643 P.2d at 544; see also 
State v. Hoffman, 73 Haw. 41, 54, 828 P.2d 805, 813 (1992) 
(applying Melemai to hold that custody attached when the police 
obtained probable cause because defendant admitted to possessing a bottle of beer in a public park); State v. Russo, 67 Haw. 126, 
135-36 & n.6, 681 P.2d 553, 560-61 & n.6 (1984) (officers went to defendant’s apartment at 4 a.m. to question him about a murder; Miranda warnings required after defendant told them that 
he had recently purchased a handgun and that it was in his car, which “matched” the description of a car used during the 
murder).  
A year after Ah Loo, we considered custody under 
vastly different circumstances in Ketchum.  There, a search *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
22 
 warrant was executed by at least 60 officers at a home at 7 a.m.  
Ketchum, 97 
Hawai‘i at 111, 34 P.3d at 1010.  The officers broke 
into the house, encountered Ketchum and a co-defendant in a 
bedroom, ordered them to show their hands, and within a minute asked Ketchum for personal information including his address.  
Considering all of the circumstances, including the display of 
force by the officers, we concluded that Ketchum had been “de 
facto” arrested since a reasonable person in his position would 
have understood that they were being detained indefinitely.  Id. 
at 111-12, 127, 34 P.3d at 1010-11, 1026. 
During the course of our analysis, we reviewed our 
precedent, including Ah Loo, which we characterized as holding 
that a detainee is in custody when they are “expressly or 
impliedly accused of having committed a crime.”  Id. at 124, 34 
P.3d at 1023 (emphasis added).  We acknowledged that “we look to the totality of the circumstances,” id. at 122, 34 P.3d at 1021 
(quoting Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻi at 210, 10 P.3d at 731), that “there 
is no simple or precise bright line delineating when ‘the point 
of arrest’ has arrived,” and that “no single factor, in itself, 
is dispositive as to when a temporary investigative detention 
has morphed into an arrest,” id. at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024.  We 
then adopted the following two-part, either/or test to determine 
at what point the investigatory detention becomes custody:  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
23 
  In summary, we hold that a person is “in custody” for 
purposes of article I, section 10 of the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution if an objective assessment of the totality of 
the circumstances reflects either (1) that the person has become impliedly accused of committing a crime because the 
questions of the police have become sustained and coercive, 
such that they are no longer reasonably designed briefly to 
confirm or dispel their reasonable suspicion or (2) that 
the point of arrest has arrived because either (a) probable 
cause to arrest has developed or (b) the police have 
subjected the person to an unlawful “de facto” arrest 
without probable cause to do so. 
 
Id. at 126, 34 P.3d at 1025 (first emphasis added).14   
Although seemingly adopting a bright-line rule that 
the existence of probable cause is dispositive, Ketchum did not 
explicitly overrule our precedent indicating that the 
determination of custody requires an evaluation of all the 
circumstances.  To the contrary, Ketchum expressly affirmed not 
only the totality-of-the-circumstances test, but also Wyatt and 
Kuba, both of which evaluated the totality of the circumstances 
surrounding traffic stops: 
The concurring and dissenting opinion “ disagree[s] with the 
totality of the circumstances formulation seemingly 
adopted” by us “in this case.”  Acoba and Ramil, JJ., 
concurring in part and dissenting in part . . . , at 129, 
34 P.3d at 1028.  However, this court consistently 
addresses the question whether a defendant has been 
subjected to custodial interrogation within the context of  
                     
14  One year after Ketchum, we again relied on Ah Loo i n State v. 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawai‘i 370, 378, 56 P.3d 138, 146 (2002).  In Kaleohano, we 
held that the defendant — who had been pulled over for a traffic violation 
and detained on suspicion of OVUII — was not in custody.  Without quoting the 
either/or test from K etchum, Kaleohano emphasized the importance of probable 
cause for determining custody: “Ah Loo recognized that, ‘if neither probable 
cause to arrest nor sustained and coercive interrogation are present, then questions posed by the police do not rise to the level of “custodial 
interrogation” requiring Miranda warnings.’  We, therefore, examine whether 
[the police officer] had probable cause to arrest [the defendant].”  Id. at 
377, 56 P.3d at 145 (citation omitted) (quoting Ah Loo, 94 Hawai‘ i at 210, 10 
P.3d at 731). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
24 
 the totality of the circumstances. . . . We therefore do 
not understand our opinion to be “adopt[ing]” a new 
approach in analyzing whether custodial interrogation has 
occurred for Miranda purposes.  
Id. at 117 n.19, 34 P.3d at 1017 n.19 (emphasis added) 
(citations omitted) (citing Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻi at 210, 10 P.3d at 
731; Kuba, 68 Haw. at 188-90, 706 P.2d at 1309-10; Wyatt, 67 
Haw. at 299, 687 P.2d at 549; Patterson, 59 Haw. at 361, 581 
P.2d at 755; Kalai, 56 Haw. at 369, 537 P.2d at 11).   
Furthermore, Ketchum did not present the circumstances 
present here, where the officer had probable cause to arrest 
before engaging with the defendant and did not communicate that 
fact to the defendant.15 
2. The totality-of-the-circumstances approach, applied in 
Wyatt and Kuba, is valid and applies to this case 
We hereby clarify that the totality-of-the-
circumstances approach to traffic stops adopted in Wyatt and 
Kuba and affirmed in Ketchum remains valid and applies to this 
case.  The existence of probable cause, while relevant, is not dispositive, and the proper inquiry in determining whether a 
defendant is in custody for Miranda purposes remains the 
totality of the circumstances.   
                     
15  Although Officer Termeteet told Sagapolutele- Silva that she was 
“speeding,” he did not advise her that her speeding was subject to criminal 
sanctions.  Speeding less than thirty miles per hour over the speed limit is 
a non-criminal violation.  See, e.g. , State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai‘ i 354, 
378, 227 P.3d 520, 544 (2010), as amended (Apr. 5, 2010)  
(remanding for entry of judgment of a non- criminal traffic infraction because 
the evidence did not prove that the defendant exceeded the speed limit by at 
least thirty miles per hour). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
25 
 Both our cases and federal courts are in accord that 
traffic stops are treated under a totality-of-the-circumstances 
analysis.  In Berkemer v. McCarty, the United States Supreme 
Court rejected a “rule under which questioning of a suspect detained pursuant to a traffic stop would be deemed ‘custodial 
interrogation’ if and only if the police officer had probable 
cause to arrest the motorist for a crime,” explaining: 
The threat to a citizen’s Fifth Amendment rights that 
Miranda was designed to neutralize has little to do with 
the strength of an interrogating officer’s suspicions.  And, by requiring a policeman conversing with a motorist 
constantly to monitor the information available to him to determine when it becomes sufficient to establish probable 
cause, the rule proposed by respondent would be extremely 
difficult to administer. 
 
468 U.S. 420, 435 n.22 (1984). 
The defendant in Berkemer was pulled over after a 
state trooper saw him weaving in and out of traffic.  After the 
defendant exited his vehicle, the officer noticed he had trouble 
standing and decided to charge him with a traffic offense and to 
prevent him from leaving the scene.  Id. at 423.  The Supreme 
Court held that Miranda warnings were not required, and 
distinguished roadside stops from the circumstances at issue in 
Miranda and its progeny.  Id. at 441.  First, during ordinary 
traffic stops, detentions are usually brief and presumptively temporary; second, traffic stops are usually conducted in 
public, where the atmosphere is “substantially less ‘police dominated.’”  Id. at 439-40.  While roadside stops may morph *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
26 
 into custodial situations if the defendant is “subjected to 
treatment that renders him ‘in custody’ for practical purposes,” the Court did not find those circumstances present here.  Id. at 
440 (citation omitted).  The Court explained, 
Only a short period of time elapsed between the stop and 
the arrest.  At no point during that interval was 
respondent informed that his detention would not be 
temporary.  Although [the arresting officer] apparently 
decided as soon as respondent stepped out of his car that respondent would be taken into custody and charged with a 
traffic offense, [ the officer] never communicated his 
intention to respondent.  A policeman's unarticulated plan 
has no bearing on the question whether a suspect was ‘in 
custody’ at a particular time; the only relevant inquiry is 
how a reasonable man in the suspect's position would have 
understood his situation. 
Id. at 441-42.   
As we explained in Wyatt, “the ultimate test is 
whether the questioning was of a nature that ‘would “subjugate 
the individual to the will of his examiner” and thereby 
undermine the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination.’”  
67 Haw. at 299, 687 P.2d at 549 (quoting Rhode Island v. Innis, 
446 U.S. 291, 299 (1980)).  The question of custody therefore turns on the perceptions of a reasonable person in the 
detainee’s position.
16  Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 125, 34 P.3d at 
                     
16  Indeed, Sagapolutele- Silva faults the ICA for treating the OVUII 
as a “separate and distinct” OVUII investigation in which probable cause had 
not yet developed, and we agree that this bifurcation of the traffic stop 
into two investigations for two crimes – while understandable given our 
either/or test – d oes not reflect reality.  A suspect probably does not 
perceive two separate and concurrent investigations during a single police 
encounter, and the existence of probable cause for one crime, but not the 
other, is unlikely to impact whether a reasonable person in the suspect’s 
position would perceive themselves as effectively under arrest.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
27 
 (continued...) 1024 (reciting the test as whether “[an] innocent person could 
reasonably have believed that he [or she] was not free to go and that he [or she] was being taken into custody indefinitely” 
(quoting Kraus, 793 F.2d at 1109)).  While “[a]n officer’s 
knowledge or beliefs may bear upon the custody issue if they are 
conveyed, by word or deed, to the individual being questioned,” 
they “are relevant only to the extent they would affect how a 
reasonable person in the position of the individual being 
questioned would gauge the breadth of his or her ‘“freedom of 
action.”’”  Stansbury v. California, 511 U.S. 318, 325 (1994) 
(citations omitted) (quoting Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 440).  The existence of probable cause that is not disclosed to the suspect 
— as opposed to when a suspect is confronted with the officer’s 
suspicions, or the evidence supporting them — is unlikely to 
impact the suspect’s perceptions of the encounter.
17  By the same 
                     
17  Our review of other jurisdictions suggests that, consistent with 
the principle that the objective perspective of the suspect controls, 
probable cause usually fits into the totality- of-the-circumstances analysis 
as follows: 
 
[W]hile the place of the interrogation is a very 
significant factor, it must be considered together with the 
other surrounding circumstances.  In ascertaining, as 
called for by Miranda, whether the deprivation of freedom 
of action was “significant” (i.e., whether the 
circumstances were “likely to affect substantially the 
individual’ s ‘will to resist and compel him to speak where 
he would not otherwise do so freely’”), it is particularly important whether some indicia of arrest are present.  A 
Court is not likely to find custody for Miranda purposes if 
the police were not even in a position to physically seize the suspect, but is likely to find custody if there was 
physical restraint such as handcuffing, drawing a gun, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
28 
 token, an after-the-fact determination that the police could 
have arrested the detainee should play little role in determining whether or not the detainee felt they were under 
arrest. 
As discussed earlier, see supra section IV.A.1, our 
cases recognize that it is highly relevant when probable cause 
develops during the course of questioning the defendant.  See, 
e.g., Melemai, 64 Haw. at 482, 643 P.2d at 544 (holding Miranda 
warnings were required where probable cause developed at the 
scene and custody attached); see also Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻi at 212, 
10 P.3d at 733 (“[I]f the detained person’s responses to a 
police officer’s questions provide the officer with probable 
cause to arrest . . . the officer is — at that time — required 
to [provide Miranda warnings].”).   The defendant is present 
                                                                  
(continued . . .) 
holding by the arm, or placing into a police car.  Merely 
having the suspect move a short distance to facilitate 
conversion does not itself constitute custody.  Also 
relevant are whether or not the suspect was “confronted 
with evidence that was at least sufficient to establish 
probable cause,” or was told that there was a warrant for 
his arrest or, on the other hand, that he was free to leave and, if the events occur at the station, whether or not 
booking procedures were employed. 
 
2 Wayne R. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 6.6(f) (4th ed. 2021) 
(emphasis added) (footnotes omitted); see, e.g., State v. Williams, 15 A.3d 
753, 755 (Me. 2011) (explaining the factors used to determine whether a suspect was in custody, including “the existence or non- existence of probable 
cause to arrest (to the extent communicated to the defendant)” (emphasis 
added)); People v. Null, 233 P.3d 670, 677 (Colo. 2010) (holding that the 
defendant was in custody because, inter alia, defendant knew the police had 
grounds to arrest him); State v. Ortiz, 382 S.W.3d 367, 373 (Tex. Crim. App. 
2012) (noting that a suspect may be in custody “if the officer manifests his 
belief to the detainee that he is a suspect”). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
29 
 during that questioning, and both the officer’s questions and 
the defendant’s answers can contribute to a coercive atmosphere of which the defendant is aware.   
However, probable cause developed prior to the 
officer’s questioning of the suspect is a far different matter.  
While we have recognized that it is relevant to assessing 
whether the defendant was in fact free to leave, see Patterson, 
59 Haw. at 361, 581 P.2d at 755 (“Where the police, prior to questioning the individual, are in possession of facts 
sufficient to effect an arrest without a warrant based on 
probable cause, it is less likely that the person confronted would be allowed to come and go as he pleases.”), it has limited 
relevance to assessing the coerciveness of the encounter from 
the defendant’s point of view.  The instant case provides a good 
example: although Officer Termeteet told Sagapolutele-Silva that 
she had been “speeding,” and although she acknowledged that to 
be the case,
 there is nothing to indicate that Sagapolutele-Silva 
understood that she had implicated herself in a crime.  Indeed, 
had she been going only three miles per hour slower, Officer 
Termeteet would not have had probable cause to arrest her for 
excessive speeding.  
In Wyatt, we considered whether Miranda warnings were 
required for “roadside questioning of the defendant after she 
was stopped for operating a motor vehicle on a street in Waikiki *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
30 
 without lighted headlamps in violation of the City’s traffic 
code.”  67 Haw. at 298, 687 P.2d at 549.  The officer there directed the defendant to pull her vehicle over, asked for her 
documents, and noticed a smell of liquor emanating from the 
vehicle.  He asked the defendant if she had been drinking, which 
she “readily admitted.”  Id. at 296-97, 687 P.2d at 547-48.  He 
then asked if she would be willing to perform a field sobriety test, and she agreed.  The test indicated she might have been 
under the influence of intoxicants, and she was arrested.  Id. 
at 297, 687 P.2d at 548. 
  We held that the officer was not required to advise the defendant of her Miranda rights before asking her if she had 
been drinking, noting: 
[T]he record does not reveal the intimidating or inherently 
coercive factors usually extant when interrogation is 
conducted in a custodial setting.  Rather, what transpired 
here may be more aptly described as on- the-scene 
questioning of brief duration conducted prior to arrest in 
public view.  In short, the circumstances surrounding the 
incident cannot support an inference that Miranda rights 
were triggered yet ignored; for nothing in the record suggests the setting was custodial or that the interrogation was of a nature likely to subjugate the 
defendant to the will of her examiner and undermine the 
constitutionally guaranteed privilege against self-
incrimination. 
 
Id. at 300-301, 687 P.2d at 550 (footnote omitted).  
  A year later, we affirmed the holding in Wyatt under 
“almost indistinguishable” facts in Kuba.  There, the defendant 
was stopped by police after straddling two lanes and traveling 
five miles per hour in a twenty-five mile per hour zone.  Kuba, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
31 
 68 Haw. at 185, 706 P.2d at 1307.  An officer stopped the 
defendant, requested his license, and asked him to step out ofthe vehicle.  The officer observed that the defendant appeared
disoriented and unsteady on his feet.  The officer told the 
defendant the reason for the stop and informed him that he 
suspected the defendant of driving while intoxicated.  The 
defendant responded that he had consumed four beers at a 
downtown bar, and the officer asked him if he “normally gets 
wasted on four beers.”  Id.  In response, the defendant stated
that he had “also smoked some marijuana.”  Id. at 185-86, 706 
P.2d at 1307.  After failing a field sobriety test, the defendant was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol in violation of HRS § 291-4 (1976).   Id. at 186, 706 
P.2d at 1308.   
18 
 
 
  As in Wyatt, we held that the officer was not required 
to advise Kuba of her Miranda rights before asking questions.  
Id. at 189, 706 P.2d at 1310.  We noted that the officer’s 
roadside questioning, “similar to that in Wyatt,” was composed 
of “legitimate, straightforward, and noncoercive question[s] 
necessary to obtain information to issue a traffic citation.”  
Id. at 188-89, 706 P.2d at 1309-10.   
                     
18  This charge was later amended to a charge of driving while under 
the influence of drugs in violation of HRS § 291- 7 (1976).  Id. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
32 
   Nothing in Wyatt or Kuba suggests that the existence 
of probable cause should be dispositive of whether the defendant 
was in custody.  Significantly, the defendant in Wyatt had been 
observed by the officer driving without her lights on, which we noted was defined by the Traffic Code of the City and County of 
Honolulu as a misdemeanor punishable by up to ten days in prison 
for a first offense.  Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 296 n.3, 687 P.2d at 547 
n.3.  Yet the existence of probable cause to arrest for that criminal offense did not enter into this court’s consideration 
in either case.
19  Rather, this court focused on the coerciveness 
of the encounter viewed in light of the totality of the 
circumstances.  Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 299, 687 P.2d at 549; see also 
Kuba, 68 Haw. at 189, 706 P.2d at 1309-10.   
That approach should be upheld, especially in the 
traffic context, because it allows police to adequately investigate before deciding whether to arrest a suspect or to 
simply issue a citation.  See Patterson, 59 Haw. at 361-362, 581 
P.2d at 755 (“The adoption of the Miranda rule . . . was never 
intended to hamper law enforcement agencies in the exercise of their investigative duties or in the performance of their 
traditional investigatory functions.”).  A rule that a detainee 
                     
19  We noted in passing that “[t] he obvious violation of the Traffic 
Code gave [the officers] reason to seek information necessary for the 
issuance of a citation.”  Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 300, 687 P.2d at 549.  However, 
under HRS § 803- 5 (1982), the officers could have arrested the defendant 
since it was a criminal offense. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
33 
 is in custody from the moment probable cause exists, and must 
accordingly be advised of their Miranda rights before any questioning can take place, effectively requires police officers
to make an “‘all or nothing’ choice between arrest and 
inaction,” which is precisely the situation that investigatory 
detentions were intended to prevent.  Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 211, 
10 P.3d at 732 (quoting Patterson, 59 Haw. at 363, 581 P.2d at 
756); see also Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 38 n.23, 856 P.2d 
1207, 1226 n.23 (1993) (“We do not require the police to have 
probable cause to arrest prior to the administration of the 
field sobriety test because such a requirement unduly burdens 
law enforcement.”).  
Here, when Officer Termeteet approached Sagapolutele-
Silva’s vehicle, he noticed the odor of alcohol coming from inside and, during the course of requesting her documents, noted 
that she had red, watery, and glassy eyes.  He suspected she may 
have been drinking, and asked “if she can do the field sobriety 
test to make sure she was safe to drive.”  Under the bright-
line, either/or rule applied by the district court here, Officer 
Termeteet would have been required to give Miranda warnings to 
Sagapolutele-Silva as soon as he approached her vehicle, before he could question her.  If she had invoked her right to remain silent or to have counsel present, Officer Termeteet would not 
have been able to conduct a field sobriety test to determine *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
34 
 whether she was safe to drive and would have been forced to 
decide on other facts whether to arrest her or to simply cite her and allow her to drive away.    
20
A bright-line test focusing on probable cause does 
not, therefore, serve the purpose of the Miranda rule: to 
prevent the police from coercing suspects into answering incriminating questions against their will.  See Howes v. 
Fields, 565 U.S. 499, 508–09 (2012) (“‘[C]ustody’ is a term of 
art that specifies circumstances that are thought generally to 
present a serious danger of coercion.”); Melemai, 64 Haw. at 
482, 643 P.2d at 544 (holding Miranda warnings were required 
when “the totality of circumstances created the kind of coercive atmosphere that Miranda warnings were designed to prevent”).  In 
this case, Officer Termeteet’s questioning was properly limited to “that which was minimally necessary for him to decide upon a 
reasonable course of investigatory action.”  Patterson, 59 Haw. 
at 364, 581 P.2d at 756.   
For the foregoing reasons, we reaffirm that whether or 
not a defendant is “in custody” requires “objectively appraising 
the totality of the circumstances.”  Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 
                     
20  Officer Termeteet was not required by law to arrest Sagapolutele-
Silva for excessive speeding — as he testified at the suppression hearing, he 
had the discretion to issue a citation for excessive speeding and allow her 
to drive away.  But his decision on whether to cite or arrest her had significant public safety consequences.  As he testified, he wanted to 
administer the SFST because “I don’t want her, you know, cite her for the 
excessive speeding and then she hurts herself or another person afterwards.” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
35 
 643 P.2d at 544.  Courts may consider probable cause as part of 
that inquiry — and indeed, they should if the circumstances warrant it, such as when the suspect is confronted with the 
facts that establish probable cause.  But the ultimate 
touchstone is whether, under an objective view of the totality 
of the circumstances, the de facto point of arrest has arrived.  
Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024. 
B.  Under the Totality of the Circumstances, Sagapolutele-Silva 
Was Not in Custody 
  The totality-of-the-circumstances custody analysis 
looks for “any . . . event[s] or condition[s] that betoken[] a 
significant deprivation of freedom, ‘such that an innocent 
person could reasonably have believed that he or she was not 
free to go and that he or she was being taken into custody indefinitely.’”  Id. (alterations omitted) (quoting Kraus, 793 
F.2d at 1109).  And “the ultimate test is whether the questioning was of a nature that ‘would “subjugate the 
individual to the will of his examiner” and thereby undermine 
the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination.’”  Wyatt, 
67 Haw. at 299, 687 P.2d at 549 (quoting Innis, 446 U.S. at 
299).  Relevant factors include: “the time, place and length of 
the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, and the 
conduct of the police at the time of the interrogation.”  Id. 
(alterations omitted) (quoting State v. Paahana, 66 Haw. 499, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
36 
 503, 666 P.2d 592, 595 (1983)).  “[W]hether the investigation 
has focused on the suspect and whether the police have probable cause to arrest him prior to questioning” may be relevant, but 
not dispositive.  Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 544.  A 
temporary investigative detention — such as a routine traffic 
stop — is often not custodial under a totality-of-the-
circumstances analysis.  Ah Loo, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 211, 10 P.3d at 
732 (“[G]enerally speaking, a person lawfully subjected to a 
temporary investigative detention by a police officer . . . is 
not subjected to ‘custodial interrogation’ when the officer 
poses noncoercive questions to the detained person that are 
designed to confirm or dispel the officer’s reasonable 
suspicion.” (Citation omitted.)).  
In considering whether a temporary detention has 
“morphed into an arrest,” this court looks for factors traditionally associated with arrest, such as “handcuffing, 
leading the detainee to a different location, subjecting him or 
her to booking procedures, ordering his or her compliance with 
an officer’s directives, using force, or displaying a show of 
authority beyond that inherent in the mere presence of a police 
officer.”  Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024 (quoting 
Kraus, 793 F.2d at 1109); see also People v. Null, 233 P.3d 670, 
676-77 (Colo. 2010) (holding traffic stop became custodial after 
the defendant failed several sobriety tests, including a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
37 
 portable breath test, police surrounded the defendant and 
prevented him from walking away, and the defendant was detained for fifteen minutes). 
  
Here, the totality of the circumstances show that 
Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody for purposes of article I, 
section 10 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution until after the SFST.  
Although the district court concluded that “legal custody had 
attached,” it made no finding that Sagapolutele-Silva’s freedom 
of movement had been curtailed to a degree “that betoken[ed] a 
significant deprivation of freedom such that an innocent person 
could reasonably have believed that he or she was not free to go 
and that he or she was being taken into custody indefinitely.”  
Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024 (quotation marks, 
citation, and alterations omitted).  And indeed, the relevant 
circumstances did not support such a finding.  Although the 
officers had probable cause to arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for 
excessive speeding and she had become the focus of an OVUII investigation, the officers’ conduct did not suggest that she 
was in fact under arrest until after the SFST.  Before the SFST, 
Sagapolutele-Silva was not told she was being arrested; she was 
not handcuffed or taken to the police station; there were, at 
most, two officers present during the traffic stop, which 
occurred “in public view,” Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 300, 687 P.2d at 
550, and neither officer used physical force or displayed “a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
38 
 show of authority beyond that inherent in the mere presence of a 
police officer,” Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 125, 34 P.3d at 1024; see 
Patterson, 59 Haw. at 363-64, 581 P.2d at 756 (finding no 
custody where “[n]o guns were drawn and kept upon the 
defendant,” “he [was not] confronted and subjected to an 
overbearing show of force,” “[t]he interview itself was brief,” 
and “[t]he questions were not couched in accusatory terms”).  
Although Sagapolutele-Silva exited her vehicle, that does not 
necessarily turn the traffic stop into a custodial arrest.  See 
Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 38, 856 P.2d 1207, 1226 (1993) 
(“Ordering the driver to exit the vehicle is an extension of the [temporary investigative] seizure that must be accompanied by 
sufficient facts to support the officer’s action.”).  
  Under a totality-of-the-circumstances analysis, Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody up to and during her 
performance on the SFST.  Objectively viewed, the circumstances 
of the traffic stop did not rise to the level of a de facto 
arrest until after that point.  Ketchum, 97  at 125, 34 Hawai‘i
P.3d at 1024.  “Custody” is a necessary component of custodial 
interrogation, and so the conclusion that Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody ends the inquiry — we need not and do not 
consider whether the officers “interrogated” her during the 
encounter.  Her statements made during this pre-arrest period 
accordingly need not be suppressed for want of Miranda warnings.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
39 
 In light of our conclusion that there was no custody in this 
case until after the SFST, any evidence suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree likewise need not be suppressed.  We 
therefore vacate the district court’s order suppressing all of 
Sagapolutele-Silva’s statements up to, during, and after her 
performance on the SFST.
21 
V. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s June 19, 2020 
judgment on appeal and the June 22, 2020 amended judgment on 
appeal are affirmed in part and vacated in part, and the 
district court’s June 7, 2019 judgment and August 26, 2019 amended judgment are vacated.  This case is remanded to the 
district court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.  
Brian R. Vincent   
for Petitioner and Respondent 
State of Hawai‘ i     /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 
/s/ Paul B.K. Wong   
 
   
    
Alen M. Kaneshiro   
for Respondent and Petitioner Tiana F.M. Sagapolutele-Silva    
                     
21  The district court suppressed Sagapolutele- Silva’s statement that 
she had fewer drinks than her friends on the grounds that it was fruit of 
earlier improper questioning.  At the time she made that statement, she had 
been advised that she was under arrest.  We do not opine on whether some 
other ground might exist to suppress that statement.  
