 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-24-0000715 30-MAY-2025 12:30 PM Dkt. 3 OGAC 
SCWC-24-0000715 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I
 
IN THE INTEREST OF F.G. 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-24-0000715; FC-S NO. 23-00093) 
 
ORDER 
(By: Recktenwald, C.J., McKenna, Eddins, Ginoza, and Devens, JJ.) 
Upon consideration of Mother-Appellant’s Notice of 
Intent to File Application for Writ of Certiorari (Notice), 
filed on May 22, 2025, the record herein, and to preserve her constitutional right to court-appointed counsel in this parental rights termination proceeding, we construe Mother-Appellant’s 
Notice as an Application for Writ of Certiorari. Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that: 
1. Mother-Appellant’s Application for Writ of 
Certiorari is accepted. 
2. This case is temporarily remanded to the Family 
Court of the First Circuit for the appointment of counsel for Mother-Appellant.  
    
   
   
   4. Within seven business days of the entry of this 
order, the family court shall issue an order appointing counsel. 
5. A supplemental record containing all documents 
filed during the period of temporary remand shall be transmitted 
to this court within five business days after the filing of the 
family court’s appointment of counsel. 
6. After remand is complete, this court will issue a 
briefing schedule for all parties. 
7. The appellate clerk shall transmit a copy of this 
order to the Family Court of the First Circuit for filing in 
FC-S No. 23-00093. 
We further note that the family court attempted to 
address this situation while the case was pending in the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals, by filing a “Request for Temporary 
Remand” (“Request”) on May 15, 2025. The ICA construed that 
filing as a “motion” made on behalf of Mother-Appellant and 
suggested that such action was not authorized by the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct. We respectfully, but strongly, disagree. 
As reflected by the family court’s thoughtful 
explanation in the “Request”, the family court was bringing a 
potential violation of Mother-Appellant’s constitutional rights 
to the attention of the appellate court. As emphasized by Rule 
2.6(a) of the Revised Code of Judicial Conduct, “[a] judge shall 
accord to every person who has a legal interest in a proceeding, 
2  
  
 
 or that person’s lawyer, the right to be heard according to law.” 
Inaction by the family court in these circumstances would have 
countenanced a denial of Mother-Appellant’s rights. Thus, the 
“Request” was fully consistent with the family court’s obligation 
under the Code. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai i, May 30, 2025. 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
/s/ Vladimir P. Devens 
 
3 