***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
MICHAEL DOYLE RUGGLES, REV. NANCY WAITE HARRIS,  
KENNETH V. MIYAMOTO- SLAUGHTER, WENDY TATUM, DAVID TATUM, and 
ROBERT S. MURRAY, Petitioners/Plaintiffs- Appellants,  
and 
GEORGE HERMAN KLARE, BARBARA JEAN LANG, 
Plaintiffs -Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
DOMINIC YAGONG, DONALD IKEDA, J. YOSHIMOTO, DENNIS ONISHI,  
FRED BLAS, BRITTANY SMART, BRENDA FORD, ANGEL PILAGO, and  
PETE HOFFMAN, current Hawai i County Council members;  
JAY KIMURA, Hawai i County Prosecutor;  
MITCHELL ROTH and CHARLENE IBOSHI, Deputy Prosecuting Attorneys; 
BILLY KENOI, Hawai i County Mayor, respondeat superior,  
HARRY KUBOJIRI, Hawai i County Chief of Police,  
KELLY GREENWELL, GUY ENRIQUES, and EMILY NAE OLE,  
previous Hawai i County Council members,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-13-0000117 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13 -0000117; CIV. NO. 11- 1-117) 
 
JUNE 25, 2015 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND  McKENNA, JJ.;   
WITH POLLACK, J., DISSENTING, WITH WHOM WILSON, J., JOINS. 
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0000117
25-JUN-2015
09:05 AM***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
2 
 OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I.  Introduction 
 Petitioners, a group of pro se individuals from Hawai i 
County, present the following question:  “Did the Intermediate 
Court of Appeals err in determining that the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Priority of Cannabis, a voter sponsored initiative, 
in its entirety is in conflict with State laws, and is thus 
preempted by them?”  We answer this question in the negative.  
Our case law holds that a municipal ordinance may be preempted 
by state law “if (1) it covers the same subject  matter embraced 
within a comprehensive state statutory scheme disclosing an 
express or implied intent to be exclusive and uniform throughout 
the state or (2) it conflicts with state law.”   Richardson v. 
City & Cnty.  of Honolulu, 76 Hawai ʻi 46, 62, 868 P.2d 1193, 1209 
(1994) (citations omitted). 
 We accepted certiorari to clarify that the ordinance in 
this case is preempted solely because it “conflicts with state 
law.”  It is not necessary to address whether the LLEP “covers 
the same subject matter embraced within a comprehensive state 
statutory scheme disclosing an express or implied intent to be 
exclusive and uniform throughout the state . . . .”  Id.  The 
ICA’s published opinion erroneously conflates the two Richardson 
prongs, but the error is harmless, as the ICA clearly held that 
the LLEP conflicts  with state law,  and the Richardson  preemption ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
3 
 test is stated in the disjunctive.  Therefore, we affirm the 
ICA’s judgment on appeal, which affirmed the Circuit Court of 
the Third Circuit’s1 (“circuit court”) Final Judgment.  
II.  Background 
A.   Article 16 of Chapter 14 of the Hawai ʻi County Code:  
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority of Cannabis Ordinance 
 
At issue in this appeal is whether Article 16 of Chapter 14 
of the Hawai i County Code, entitled “Lowest Law E nforcement 
Priority of Cannabis ” (“LLEP”),  is preempted in its entirety by 
state law.  P assed by voter initiative in 2008, the LLEP 
provides the following, in full: 
Article 16.  Lowest Law Enforcement Priority of Cannabis 
Ordinance. 
 
Section 14- 96.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to:  
(1) Provide law enforcement more time and resources to 
focus on serious crimes;  
(2) Allow our court systems to run more efficiently;  
(3) Create space in our prisons to hold serious criminals;  
(4) Save taxpayers money and provide more funding for 
necessities such as education and health care; and  
(5) Reduce the fear of prosecution and the stigma of 
criminality from non -violent citizens who harmlessly 
cultivate and/or use cannabis for personal, medicinal, 
religious, and recreational purposes.  
 
Section 14- 97.  Findings. 
(a) The Institute of Medicine has found that cannabis 
(marijuana) has medicinal value and is not a gateway drug.  
(b) According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the 
use of cannabis (marijuana) directly results in zero deaths 
per year. 
(c) According to the National Institute of Drug Abuse 
(NIDA), the marijuana eradication program has not stopped 
cannabis cultivation in the county, rather the program has 
only decreased the availability of the plant, which 
increases its “street” value, resulting in more crime.  
                     
 1  The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
4 
 (d) The National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) also 
reported that a large increase in the use of 
methamphetamine, crack cocaine, and other hard drugs was 
related to the marijua na eradication program’s 
implementation.  
(e) According to public record, the ‘mandatory program 
review’ for the marijuana eradication program, required by 
section 3- 16 of the County Charter to be performed at least 
once every four years, has never been performed in the 
thirty years that the program has existed.  
(f) Law abiding adults are being arrested and imprisoned 
for nonviolent cannabis offenses, clogging our court 
dockets, overcrowding our prisons, tying up valuable law 
enforcement resources and costing taxpayers hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in Hawai ʻi County alone each year.  
(g) The citizens of the Cities of Hailey, Idaho; Denver, 
Colorado; Seattle, Washington; Columbia, Missouri; Eureka 
Springs, Arkansas and Santa Barbara, Oakland, Santa Monica 
and Santa Cruz, in California, and the citizens of Missoula 
County, Montana, all voted for cannabis (marijuana) to be 
placed as law enforcement’s lowest priority within the past 
five years.  
 
Section 14- 98.  Definitions. 
 “Adult” means any individual who is t wenty one years 
of age or older.  
 “Adult personal use” means the use of cannabis on 
private property by adults.  It does not include:  
(1) Distribution or sale of cannabis;  
(2) Distribution, sale, cultivation, or use of cannabis on 
public property;  
(3) Driving under the influence; or  
(4) The commercial trafficking of cannabis , or the 
possession of amounts of cannabis in excess of the amounts 
defined as being appropriate for adult personal use.  
 “Marijuana”, (as defined in the Hawai ʻi Revised 
Statutes of Chapter 712 -1240) means cannabis.  
 “Cannabis” means all parts of the cannabis plant, 
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin 
extracted from any part of the cannabis plant; and every 
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,  mixture or 
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin.  
 “Lowest Law Enforcement Priority” means a priority 
such that all law enforcement activities related to all 
offenses other than the possession or cultivation of 
cannabis for adult personal use shall be a higher priority 
than all law enforcement activities related to the adult 
personal use of cannabis.  The Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority regarding possession or cultivation of cannabis 
shall apply to any single case involving twenty four or 
fewer cannabis plants at any stage of maturity or the 
equivalent in dried cannabis, where the cannabis was 
intended for adult personal use.  
 The “dried equivalent” of twenty four or fewer 
cannabis plants shall be presumed to be twenty four or 
fewer ounces of usable cannabis, excluding stems and other 
non active parts.  A greater amount may also fall under the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
5 
 Lowest Law Enforcement Priority provisions described herein 
if such amount is shown by competent evidence to be no more 
than the dried equivalent of twenty  four plants. 
 
Section 14- 99.  Lowest law enforcement priority policy 
relating to the adult personal use of cannabis.  
(a) The cultivation, possession and use for adult personal 
use of cannabis shall be the Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority for law enforcement agencies in the county.  
(b) The council, the police commissioner, the chief of 
police and all associated law enforcement staff, deputies, 
officers and any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the 
county shall make law enforcement activity relating to 
cannabis offenses, where the cannabis was intended for 
adult personal use, their Lowest Law Enforcement Priority.  
Law enforcement activities relating to cannabis offenses 
include but are not limited to the prosecution of cannabis 
offenses involving only the adult personal use of cannabis.  
(c) Neither the chief of police, the police commissioner, 
nor any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the county, nor 
any associated law enforcement staff, deputies, nor 
officers shall seek, accept or renew any formal or informal  
deputization or commissioning by a federal law enforcement 
agency for the purpose of investigating, citing, or 
arresting adults, nor for searching or seizing property 
from adults for cannabis offenses subject to the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Priority of cannabis where such activities 
would be in violation of that policy, nor shall such 
authorities exercise such powers that may be ancillary to 
deputization or commissioning for another purpose.  
(d) The council shall not authorize the acceptance or the 
issuing of any funding that is intended to be used to 
investigate, cite, arrest, prosecute, search or seize 
property from adults for cannabis offenses in a manner 
inconsistent with the county’s Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority policy.  
 
Section 14- 100.  County prosecuting attorneys.  
 To the full extent allowed by the Constitution of the 
State of Hawai ʻi, the people, through their county 
government, request that neither the county prosecuting 
attorney nor any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the 
county shall prosecute  any violations of the sections of 
chapter 712 -1240 of the Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes regarding 
possession or cultivation of cannabis in a manner 
inconsistent with the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority, as 
described in section 14 -98 and 14- 99 of this article; in 
cases where the amount possessed or grown is less than 
twenty four plants or the dried equivalent, possession for 
adult personal use shall be presumed.  
 
Section 14- 101.  Expenditure of funds for cannabis 
enforcement.  
(a) Neither the council, nor the police commissioner, nor 
the chief of police, nor any attorneys prosecuting on 
behalf of the county, nor any associated law enforcement 
staff, deputies, or officers shall spend or authorize the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
6 
 expenditure of any public funds for the investigation, 
arrest, or prosecution of any person, nor for the search or 
seizure of any property in a manner inconsistent with the 
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority as defined in section 14 -98 
and 14-99 of this article.  
(b) The council shall not support the acceptance of any 
funds for the marijuana eradication program.  
 
Section 14- 102.  Community oversight.  
 The council shall ensure the timely implementation of 
this chapter by working with the chief of police and/or the 
police commissioner to:  
 (1) Provide for procedures to receive  grievances from 
individuals who believe that they were subjected to law 
enforcement activity contrary to the Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority of cannabis, which is described in section 14 -98 
and 14-99 of this article; and  
 (2) Publish a report semi -annually on the 
implementation of this chapter every first day of June and 
every first day of December, from this day forward, with 
the first report being issued June 1, 2009.  These reports 
shall include but not be limited to:  the number of all 
arrests, citations, property seizures, and prosecutions for 
all cannabis offenses in the county, the number of 
complaints regarding marijuana eradication over -flights; 
the breakdown of all cannabis arrests and citations by 
race, age, specific charge, and classification as  
infraction, misdemeanor, or felony, the estimated time and 
money spent by the county on law enforcement and punishment 
for adult cannabis offenses, and any instances of officers 
or deputies assisting in state or federal enforcement of 
adult cannabis offenses.  These reports shall be published 
with the cooperation of the county prosecuting attorney, 
the chief of police, and all associated law enforcement 
staff in providing needed data.  
 
Section 14- 103.  Notification of local, state, and federal 
officials. 
(a) After the enactment of this article, the county clerk 
shall send letters on an annual basis (every June 1st of 
each year) to the mayor of the county, the county of Hawai ʻi 
voters’ Congressional Delegation, Hawai ʻi’s  U.S. senators, 
the county of Hawai ʻi voters’ representatives in the Hawai ʻi 
State Legislature, the Governor of Hawai ʻi, and the 
President of the United States.  This letter shall state; 
“The citizens of the County of Hawai ʻi have passed an 
initiative to make Cannabis offenses the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Priority, where the Cannabis is intended for 
adult personal use, and request that the federal and state 
branches of government remove criminal penalties for the 
cultivation, possession and use of Cannabis for adult 
personal use; the citizens also request that Cannabis 
policies here within the county of Hawai ʻi be dealt with 
from our local law enforcement only.”  The letters may also 
state, be it the will of the county council; that according 
to the three year study performed by the National Institute ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
7 
 on Drug Abuse, more people used methamphetamine as a result 
of the marijuana eradication program; they may also express 
that methamphetamine is a growing problem in our community 
and more help would be appreciated in that area, and that 
the first action that would help in that area would be to 
end the marijuana eradication program.  
(b) This duty shall be carried out until state and federal 
laws are changed accordingly.  
 
Section 14- 104.  Statutory and constitutional 
interpretation.  
All provisions in this article shall only be implemented to 
the full extent that the Constitution of the State of 
Hawaiʻi and the Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes allows, and in the 
event, and only in the event, that a court of competent 
jurisdiction determines that any provision in any section 
of this article may not be directed by voter initiative or 
by action of the council, then that specific mandatory 
provision only shall be deemed advisory and expression of 
the will of the people that the provision shall be 
implemented into law by whichever government branch or 
official who has to the power to implement it, and that the 
council shall take all actions within their power to work 
with those branches of government to express the will of 
the people and encourage, support, and request the 
implementation of those provisions.  
 
Section 14- 105.  Severability. 
In the event, and only in the event, that a court of 
competent jurisdiction should find one or more of the 
sections, or parts of the sections of this article illegal, 
or any provision of this article or the application thereof 
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the 
remainder of the article and the application of such 
provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be 
affected thereby.  
 
 B. Plaintif fs’ Complaints  
 Plaintiffs filed their “Complaint for Breach of Duty to 
Enforce Article 16 Section 14- 96 through Section 14- 105 of the 
Hawaii County Code and Request for Immediate Injuctive [sic] 
Relief and Damages.”  They named as Defendants the members of 
the Hawaiʻ i County Council (Dominic Yagong, Donald Ikeda, J. 
Yoshimoto, Dennis Onishi, Fred Blas, Brittany Smart, Brenda 
Ford, Angel Pilago, and Pete Hoffman); Hawai ʻi County Prosecutor ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
8 
 Jay Kimura and Deputy Prosecutors Mitchell Roth and Charlene 
Iboshi; Hawaiʻi County Mayor Billy Kenoi; Hawai ʻi County Chief of 
Police Harry Kubojiri; and previous Hawai ʻi County Council 
Members Kelly Greenwell, Guy Enriques, and Emily Nae ʻole 
(collectively, “Defendants”).  Plaintiffs alleged that the 
Defendants failed to comply with the LLEP.   
Specifically, the Plaintiffs alleged that the Hawai ʻi County 
Council continued “ to appropriate cannabis enforcement funds to 
the Police Department, Prosecutor’s Office, and the Department 
of Corrections,” in violation of (1) Section 14 -99’s prohibition 
against “the acceptance or the issuing of any funding that is 
intended to be used to investigate, cite, arrest, prosecute, 
search or seize property for adults for cannabis offenses,” and 
(2) Section 14- 101’s prohibition on expending “pu blic funds for 
the investigation, arrest, or prosecution of any person, [or] 
the search or seizure of any property” in a man ner inconsistent 
with the LLEP.  
The Plaintiffs next asserted  that the Hawai ʻi County Council 
violated Section 14- 102(2) by failing to issue a semi -annual 
report in accordance with that section.  The Plaintiffs also 
alleged that the Hawai ʻi County Police Department did issue a 
report, but the report was incomplete, and the Hawai ʻi County 
Council did not ensure the report’s publication.  The Plaintiffs ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
9 
 also posited  that all of the Defendants violated Section      
14-102(1) by failing to provide procedures to receive grievances 
from individuals.  
The Plaintiffs alleged that the prosecutors and police 
violated the LLEP by “continu[ing] to prosecute cannabis cases 
where the amount processed or grown is less than 24 plants or 
the dried equivalent of 24 ounces. . . .”   
Additionally, the Plaintiffs asserted that the prosecutors 
and police “failed to abide by secti on 14-101(a),” which 
prohibits them from expending public funds “for the 
investigation, arrest, or prosecution of  any person, [or] for 
the seizure of any property in a manner inconsistent with the 
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority. . . .”   
The Plaintiffs prayed for six items of injunctive relief.  
First, they asked that the police and prosecutors be ordered to 
immediately cease and desist investigations, arrests, or 
prosecutions of any person, or the search and seizure of any 
property, in a manner inconsiste nt with the LLEP .  Second, they 
asked that the Hawai ʻi County Council be ordered to establish 
procedures for receiving grievances under Section   14-102(1).  
Third, they asked that the Hawai ʻi County Council be ordered to 
publish semi- annual reports.  Four th, they asked for general 
compliance with the LLEP.  Fifth, the Plaintiffs asked the court 
to order the Hawaiʻ i County Council to cease authorizing or ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
10 
 accepting funds for the purposes of investigating, citing, 
arresting, prosecuting, searching or seizing property, etc., 
related to cannabis- associated offenses as outlined in the LLEP, 
and that all funds allotted to police and prosecutors be 
withheld until it could be determined how much money had been 
spent presumably in violation of the LLEP.  Sixth, they asked 
that the Hawaiʻ i County Council be ordered to hold the Hawai ʻi 
County Chief of Police accountable for upholding his oath of 
office, or else remove the Chief of Police from office.   
The Plaintiffs also prayed for $5,000,000 in punitive 
damages for the “willful and malicious violation” of the LLEP by 
the Defendants, as well as reasonable compensation to the 
Plaintiffs for “their time and expenses comparable to that of 
attorneys’ rates in the local community.”   
C.   Motions for Judgment on the Pleadings  
 
Defendants Yagong, Ikeda, Yoshimoto, Onishi, Blas, Smart, 
Ford, Pilago, Hoffmann, Roth, Iboshi, Kenoi, Kubojiri, Nae ʻole, 
Enriques, Greenwell and Kimura answered the Complaint, denying 
each of the allegations, then filed Motions for Judgment on the 
Pleadings.2  They argued that the Plaintiffs’ Complaint should be 
dismissed “on the grounds that Section 14 -96 of the Hawai ʻi 
County Code is void because it conflicts with Part IV of Chapter 
                     
 2  Greenwell and Kimura separately filed Answers, and separately 
filed a Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
11 
 712 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes,” and because it covers the 
same subject matter as Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”)         
§§ 712-1240 through - 1257 (1993), entitled Offenses Related to 
Drugs and Intoxicating Compounds.      
In their opposition to Defendants Yagong, Ikeda, Yoshimoto, 
Onishi, Blas, Smart, Ford, Pilago, Hoffmann, Roth, Iboshi, 
Kenoi, Kubojiri, Nae ʻole, and Enriques’ motion for judgment on 
the pleadings,3 the Plaintiffs counter-argued that the LLEP “does 
not attempt to prohibit or stop defendants from arresting or 
prosecuting Chapter 712 violations, nor does it duplicate, 
contradict or enter onto a subject that is fully occupied  by 
general law[;] it merely directs defendants to prioritize and 
utilize their time and resources on more important community 
issues according to the legislative statutory scheme. ”   
The circuit court granted the Defendant’s motions for 
judgment on the pleadings and dismissed the case.  In its 
orders, the circuit court made the following factual findings: 
1.  Under Section 14 -99 of the Hawai ʻi County Code, 
law enforcement activities including prosecution involving 
criminal offenses which fall within the definition of 
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority are to have the lowest 
priority. 
                     
 3  Plaintiffs filed a separate opposition to Greenwell and Kimura’ s 
motion for judgment on the pleadings.  The arguments in the opposition to 
Greenwell and Kimura’s motion for judgment on the pleadings differ slightly 
from the arguments made to the rest of the defendants, in that the Plaintiffs 
argued that the LLEP was “ passed by the people of Hawai ʻi County through a 
legally binding initiative process,” that “[t]he thrust of this initiative is 
fiscal responsibility,” not cannabis, and that the LLEP’s severability clause 
renders any invalidated provisions advisory rather than mandatory. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
12 
 2.  Under Article 16 of Chapter 14 of the Hawai ʻi 
County Code, County of Hawaiʻ i law enforcement personnel 
are: 
a) Prohibited from deputizing or commissioning 
federal enforcement personnel from participating in the 
investigation or prosecution of offenses which fall within 
the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority.  
Section 14- 99(c), Hawaiʻ i County Code.  
b) Prohibited from obtaining funds for the 
investigation or prosecution of offenses which fall within 
the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority.  
Section 14- 99(d), Hawaiʻ i County Code.  
c) Prohibited from spending or authorizing the 
spending of funds for the investigation of offenses which 
fall within the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority.  Section 14 -101(a), Hawai ʻi County Code. 
3.  Article 16, if enforced, would prevent the 
investigation and prosecution of offenses which fall within 
the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority under 
Section 14- 99 of the Hawaiʻ i County Code.  
4.  Article 16, if enforced, would prevent the 
investigation and prosecution in the County of Hawai ʻi of 
the following criminal offenses defined under the Hawai ʻi 
Penal Code:  Section 712 -1247(1)(e) Promoting a Detrimental 
Drug in the First Degree; Section 712 -1248(1)(c) Promoting 
a Detrimental Drug in the Second Degree; and Section 712 -
1249(1) Promoting  a Detrimental Drug in the Third Degree.  
 
The circuit court made the following conclusions of law: 
1.  A municipal ordinance may be preempted if it 
covers the same subject matter embraced within a 
comprehensive state statutory scheme disclosing an express 
or implied intent to be exclusive and uniform throughout 
the state or if the municipal ordinance conflicts with 
state law. 
2.  The Penal Code of the State of Hawai ʻi is a 
comprehensive code of penal laws that applies throughout 
the State of Hawai ʻi and is uniformly applied throughout the 
State.  Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes, Section 701 -106. 
3.  The provisions of Article 16 of Chapter 14, 
Hawaiʻi County Code, are preempted by the provisions of 
Title 37 of the Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes.  
4.  The provisions of Article 16 of Chapter 14, 
Hawaiʻi County Code, are thus unenforceable.  
 
The circuit court entered Final Judgment, and the 
Plaintiffs timely appealed.    
 
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
13 
  D.  ICA Appeal 
 On appeal, the Plaintiffs raised the following three points 
of error, but only the first two remain pursued on certiorari:  
1.  The Trial Court erred when it determined the provisions 
of Art. 16, Chapter 14 of the Hawai ʻi County Code 
(hereinafter referred to as “Lowest Priority Ord.” or 
“Ordinance”) were preempted by the provisions of Title 37 , 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”).  The Ordinance does not 
conflict, duplicate, contradict, or enter into an area 
fully occupied by the provisions of HRS, Title 37 ; nor does 
the Ordinance prohibit what the statute permits, or permit 
what the statute prohibits. . . . 
2.  The Trial Court erred when it did not consider the 
Severability Clause of Article 16.  The Trial Court also 
erred when it ruled that the entire Ordinance was 
unenforceable. . . .  
3.  The Trial Court erred in the Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order (FOF) by not providing 
sufficient facts to support the ultimate disposition of the 
case.  Material facts are omitted or misquoted.  As a 
result, the listed facts do not support the correct 
application of the law.  Facts cited by the Trial Court do 
not logically lead to the Conclusions of Law. . . .  
 
 In a published opinion, the ICA affirmed the circuit 
court’s Final Judgment.   Ruggles v. Yagong, 132 Hawai i 511, 323 
P.3d 155 (2014).  The ICA held the following: 
We conclude that  the LLEP conflicts with, and is thus 
preempted by state laws governing the investigation and 
prosecution of alleged violations of the Hawai ʻi Penal Code 
concerning the adult personal use of cannabis.  We further 
conclude that  the LLEP covers the adult personal use  of 
cannabis, which is the same subject matter that the 
legislature intended to govern under HRS Chapter 329 
provisions for the regulation of controlled substances.  
The LLEP is therefore preempted by the Hawai ʻi Penal Code 
and HRS Chapter 329, Hawai ʻi’s Uniform Controlled Substances 
Act. 
 
132 Hawai i at 516, 323 P.3d at 160.  The ICA did not address the 
LLEP’s severability clause.  The Plaintiffs now challenge the 
ICA’s holding that the entirety of the LLEP is in conflict with 
state law. ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
14 
 III.  Standard of Review 
 An appellate court reviews a circuit court’s order granting 
a motion for judgment on the pleadings de  novo.  See Hawaiʻi Med. 
Ass’n v. Hawaiʻ i Med. Serv. Ass’n, Inc. , 113 Hawai ʻi 77, 91, 148 
P.3d 1179, 1193  (2006). 
IV.  Discussion 
 On certiorari, the Plaintiffs argue 
(1) that there is no conflict between the Ordinance and 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes, (2) that if there is a conflict, 
there still may be no preemption of the County Ordinance by 
State general laws, and (3) that even if there is 
preemption it is only of those particular sections or parts 
of sections in which a conflict is found, and (4) that if 
in fact there is some error in the Ordinance, it is due to 
actions of the Defendant -Appellees and it is their 
responsibility to fix it.  
 
We address each of these arguments seriatim. 
 A.  Preemption under the Second Richardson Prong 
 First, the Plaintiffs argue that “there is no conflict 
between the Ordinance and Hawai i Revised Statutes. . . .”   We 
disagree and affirm the ICA’s clear holding that “the  LLEP 
conflicts with, and is thus preempted by state law governing the 
investigation and prosecution of alleged violations of the 
Hawaii Penal Code concerning the adult personal use of 
cannabis,” namely HRS Chapter 329 (the Hawai i Uniform Controlled 
Substances Act) and HRS §§ 712-1247(1)(e) (1993) (promoting a 
detrimental drug in the first degree); - 1248(1)(c) (1993) 
(promoting a detrimental drug in the second degree); and        ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
15 
 -1249(1) (1993) (promoting a detrimental drug in the third 
degree).  132 Hawai i at 515 -16, 323 P.3d at 159- 60.  
 Expanding on the ICA’s analysis, the LLEP also conflicts 
with state law requiring the state attorney general and county 
prosecuting attorney to investigate and prosecute violations of 
the statewide Penal Code.  HRS § 28- 2.5(b) (2009) delineates the 
investigative powers of the attorney general and county 
prosecuting attorneys when conducting criminal investigations.  
Pursuant to HRS § 28- 2 (2009), the attorney general “shall be 
vigilant and active in detecting offenders against the laws of 
the State, and shall prosecute the same with diligence.”  HRS   
§ 26-7 (2009) does state that “unless otherwise provided by law, 
[the department of the attorney general shall] prosecute cases 
involving violations of state laws. . . .”  The phrase as 
“otherwise provided by law” does not, however, countenance laws 
such as the LLEP.  Rather, it recognizes that, although “the 
attorney general, as the chief legal officer for the State,” has 
“the ultimate responsibility  for enforcing penal laws of 
statewide application,” “[t]he public prosecutor . . . has been 
delegated the primary authority and responsibility for 
initiating and conducting criminal prosecutions within his 
county jurisdiction.”  Amemiya v. Sapienza, 63 Ha w. 424, 427, 
629 P.2d 1126, 1129 (1981).  Thus, although the county 
prosecutor has been delegated primary prosecutorial duties, ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
16 
 under Hawai i County Charter § 9- 3(a)(2) (2010), the duties of 
the prosecuting attorney for the County of Hawai i include 
“[p]rosecut[ing] offenses against the laws of the State under 
the authority of the attorney general of the State.”  Therefore, 
county laws such as the LLEP cannot usurp the attorney general’s 
duty, delegated to the prosecuting attorney, to prosecute 
violations of the statewide penal code.    
 Therefore, the ICA correctly ruled that the LLEP conflicts 
with, and is thus preempted by, state law governing the 
investigation and prosecution of alleged violations of the 
Hawaii Penal Code.  
 B.  Preemption under the Firs t Richardson Prong 
  Second, the Plaintiffs argue “there still may be no 
preemption of the County Ordinance by State general laws,” 
pointing to the first prong of the Richardson test, which states 
that a “municipal ordinance may be preempted” if it covers the 
same subject matter embraced within a comprehensive state 
statutory scheme disclosing an express or implied intent to be 
exclusive and uniform throughout the state, or if the ordinance 
conflicts with state law.  Richardson , 76 Hawai i at 62, 868 P.2d 
at 1209 (emphasis added).  The Plaintiffs “disagree that the 
Penal Code of the State of Hawai ʻi is comprehensive, even if 
uniformly applied throughout the state.”   They contend, “Nothing ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
17 
 was expressly  mentioned in the statutes as to the Hawai ʻi Penal 
Code’s exclusivity.”  (Emphasis in original).  We read this 
argument as challenging the ICA’s conclusion that the LLEP 
“covers . . . the same subject matter that the legislature 
intended to govern under HRS Chapter 329 provisions for the 
regulation of controlled substances.”  132 Hawai i at 516, 323 
P.3d at 160.   
 The ICA did not need to address Richardson ’s first prong 
because it had already correctly determined that the ordinance 
was preempted under the second prong.  Furthermore, the ICA’s 
articulation of Richardson ’s first prong was incomplete because 
the ICA did not analyze whether HRS Chapter 329 is a 
“comprehensive statutory scheme disclosing an express or implied 
intent to be exclusive and uniform throughout the state. . . .”  
Id.  We not e that the ICA incorrectly views the Richardson 
preemption test as a single test it calls the “‘comprehensive 
statutory- scheme’ test.”  Ruggles, 132 Hawai i at 514, 323 P.3d 
at 158.  In actuality, as noted, it is a two- prong test.    
 With respect to the first prong, we need not address 
whether the  LLEP ordinance is field- preempted by state law.  We 
note that several other jurisdictions have passed LLEP ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
18 
 ordinances4, but there are no published opinions addressing the 
issue.  We also need not address, in general,  whether a 
municipal drug ordinance is field -preempted by the state Uniform 
Controlled Substances Act.  We note that such a holding is rare 
across the nation.  Of the forty- eight5 states that have adopted 
some form of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, only one has 
held that its state controlled substances act “occupies the 
field of penalizing crimes involving controlled substances, thus 
impliedly preempting ” a municipal ordina nce, which, in that 
case, provided for the forfeiture of vehicles used to acquire or 
attempt to acquire controlled substances.  O’Connell v. City of 
Stockton, 162 P.3d 583, 589, 590 (Cal. 2007).  In so holding, 
the Supreme Court of California examined, in “tedious” detail, 
the “comprehensive nature of [its state controlled substances 
act] in defining drug crimes and specifying penalties (including 
forfeiture). . . .”  162 P.3d at 588, 589.  The O’Connell  Court 
considered the California Uniform Controlled Su bstances Act “so 
thorough and detailed as to manifest the Legislature’s intent to 
                     
 4  According to the Marijuana Policy Project, the following cities 
and counties passed LLEP ordinances:  Seattle and Tacoma, Washington; 
Oakland, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz, San Francisco, Santa Monica, and West 
Hollywood, California; Eureka Springs, Arkansas; Missoula County, Montana; 
Denver, Colorado; Fayetteville, Arkansas; Hailey, Idaho, and Kalamazoo and 
Ypsilanti, Michigan. Marijuana Policy Project, Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority Jurisdictions, available at http://www.mpp.org/reports/lowest -law-
enforcement.html (last visited May 22, 2015). 
 
 5  See 9 West’s Hawaii Revised Statutes Annotated, 2013 Pocket Part 
269-270 (2013). ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
19 
 preclude local regulation.”  162 P.3d at 589.  There is no 
similar analysis into the comprehensive nature of HRS Chapter 
329 in the ICA’s opinion.  Compare O’Connell , 162 P.3 d at    
588-89, with Ruggles, 132 Hawai i at 515- 16, 323 P.3d at 159- 60.   
 The ICA did not need to reach the field preemption issue, 
however, as the Richardson test is stated in the disjunctive, 
and the ICA had already correctly held that the LLEP conflicted 
with, and was therefore preempted by, HRS Chapter 329 and HRS            
§§ 712-1247(1)(e), - 1248(1)(c), and -1249(1).  Therefore, we 
overrule the ICA’s opinion only to the extent it erroneously 
included within its conflict analysis an incomplete articulation 
of Richardson’s field -preemption prong.  As it is unnecessary to 
address the issue, we make no determination as to whether 
Chapter 329 field- preempts the LLEP under the first Richardson 
prong.   
 C.  The Severability Clause 
 Third, the Plaintiffs point out that Section 14- 105 
contains a severability clause, which reads 
 In the event, and only in the event, that a court of 
competent jurisdiction should find one or more of the 
sections, or parts of the sections of this article illegal, 
or any provision of this article or the application thereof 
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the 
remainder of the article and the application of such 
provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be 
affected thereby.  
 
Plaintiffs argue, “Neither the  circuit court nor the 
intermediate court of appeals have addressed any section of the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
20 
 Ordinance, other than the following subsections:  HCC           
§ 14-99(c); HCC § 14- 99(d); and HCC § 101(a).”   Section 14- 99(c) 
prohibits county prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement from 
being deputized or commissioned by a federal law enforcement 
agency for investigating cannabis offenses.  Sections 14- 99(d) 
and -101(a) prohibit the Hawai i County Council, county 
prosecuting attorneys, or law enforcement from using public 
funds for the investigation and prosecution of cannabis 
offenses.  Presumably, the Plaintiffs intend for only these 
provisions to be severed from the LLEP and invalidated.   
 In this case, however, the LLEP’s overarching mandate is 
the decriminalization of the adult personal use of marijuana.  
Section 14- 96(5) states that the purpose of the LLEP is to 
“[r]educe the fear of prosecution and the stigma of criminality 
from non- violent citizens who harmlessly cultivate and/or use 
cannabis for personal, medicinal, religious, and recreational 
purposes.”  This purpose i s supported by the following finding:  
“Law abiding adults are being arrested and imprisoned for 
nonviolent cannabis offenses, clogging our court dockets, 
overcrowding our prisons, tying up valuable law enforcement 
resources and costing taxpayers hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in Hawaiʻ i County alone each year. ”  Section 14 -97(f). 
Section 14 -98 defines “Lowest Law Enforcement Priority” in 
a way that calls for law enforcement officials to prioritize the ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
21 
 possession and cultivation of 24 or fewer marijuana plants (or 
the possession of 24 or fewer ounces of usable cannabis) by 
persons over 21 years of age on private property at the  absolute 
lowest level.  In service of decriminalizing adult personal use 
of cannabis, the following emphasized provisions directly 
prohibit the police and prosecutors from investigating and 
prosecuting adult personal use of cannabis, as defined under 
Section 14 -98.  The following emphasized provisions also 
prohibit the county, police, and prosecutors from engaging in 
indirect activities (such as using public funds and seeking 
federal deputization) related to the investigation and 
prosecution of adult personal use of cannabis, as defined under 
Section 14- 98: 
Section 14- 99.  Lowest law enforcement priority policy 
relating to the adult personal use of cannabis.  
(a) The cultivation, possession and use for adult personal 
use of cannabis shall be the Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority for law enforcement agencies in the county.  
(b) The council, the police commissioner, the chief of 
police and all associated law enforcement staff, deputies, 
officers and any attorney prosecuting  on behalf of the 
county shall make law enforcement activity relating to 
cannabis offenses, where the cannabis was intended for 
adult personal use, their Lowest Law Enforcement Priority.  
Law enforcement activities relating to cannabis offenses 
include but are not limited to the prosecution of cannabis 
offenses involving only the adult personal use of cannabis . 
(c) Neither the chief of police, the police commissioner, 
nor any attorney prosecuting  on behalf of the county, nor 
any associated law enforcement staff, deputies, nor 
officers shall seek, accept or renew any formal or informal 
deputization or commission by a federal law enforcement 
agency for the purpose of investigating, citing, or 
arresting adults, nor for searching or seizing property 
from adults for cannabis offenses subject to the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Priority of cannabis where such activities 
would be in violation of that policy, nor shall such 
authorities exercise such powers that may be ancillary to 
deputization or commissioning for another purpose.  ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
22 
 (d) The council shall not authorize the acceptance or the 
issuing of any funding that is intended to be used to 
investigate, cite, arrest, prosecute, search or seize 
property from adults for cannabis offenses in a manner 
inconsistent with the county’s Lowest Law Enforcement 
Priority policy. 
 
Section 14- 100.  County prosecuting attorneys.  
 To the full extent allowed by the Constitution of the 
State of Hawai ʻi, the people, through their county 
government, request that neither the county prosecuting 
attorney nor any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the 
county shall prosecute any violations of the sections of 
chapter 712 -1240 of the Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes regarding 
possession or cultivation of cannabis in a manner 
inconsistent with the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority, as 
described in section 14 -98 and 14- 99 of this article; in 
cases where the amount possessed or grown is less than 
twenty four plants or the dried equivalent, possession for 
adult personal use shall be presumed.  
 
Section 14- 101.  Expenditure of funds for cannabis 
enforcement.  
(a) Neither the council, nor the police commissioner, nor 
the chief of police, nor any attorneys prosecuting on 
behalf of the county, nor any associated law enforcement 
staff, deputies, or officers shall spend or authorize the 
expenditure of any public funds for the investigation, 
arrest, or prosecution of any person, nor for the search or 
seizure of any property in a manner inconsistent with the 
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority  as defined in section 14- 98 
and 14-99 of this article.  
(b) The council shall not support the acceptance of any 
funds for the marijuana eradication program.  
 
Also of note, miscellaneous provisions in the LLEP  direct 
further action premised upon the validity of the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Policy.  First, Section 14- 102, entitled “Community 
oversight,” directs the Hawai ʻi County Council to provide 
“procedures to receive grievances from individuals who believe 
that they were subjected to law enforcement activity contrary to 
the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority of cannabis,” and to 
“[p]ublish a report semi -annually on the implementation of this 
chapter. . . .”   Second, Section 14 -103, entitled “Notification ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
23 
 of local, state, and federal officials,”  requires the county 
clerk to send an annual letter to local, state , and federal 
government officials, requesting “that Cannabis policies here 
within the county of Hawai ʻi be dealt with from our local law 
enforcement only.”   
 In short, every section of the LLEP (with the exception of 
non-substantive Section 14- 104, entitled “Statutory and 
constitutional interpretation,” and non -substantive Section    
14-105, entitled “Severability”) directs the county, c ounty 
officials, police, and/or prosecutors to cease investigating and 
prosecuting violations of HRS 329, which lists marijuana as a 
controlled substance under Schedule I, and HRS                 
§§ 712-1247(1)(e), - 1248(1)(c), and -1249(1), which criminalize 
knowing possession of marijuana, in amounts ranging from “any 
amount” to “one pound or more.”   Therefore, invalidation of all 
of the LLEP was necessary.  Every substantive section of the 
LLEP conflicts with, and is therefore preempted by, state law.  
 D.  The Effect of Section 14- 104 of the LLEP  
 Fourth, the Plaintiffs point out that Section 14 -104, 
entitled “Statutory and constitutional interpretation,” provides 
that if any part of the LLEP is invalidated, “then that specific 
mandatory provision only shall be deemed advisory and expression 
of the will of the people that the provision shall be 
implemented into law by whichever government branch or official ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
24 
 who has the power to implement it,” thus placing the 
responsibility upon the Defendants to “fix” the LLEP  to make it 
enforceable.  As t he entire LLEP conflicts with, and is 
therefore preempted by, state law, however, no part of it is 
amenable to implementation by the Defendants.     
 Therefore, we respectfully disagree with the Dissent’s 
position that portions of the LLEP should remain as “advisory 
ordinances.”  A county’s po wer to promulgate ordinances is 
governed by Article VIII, Section 1 of the Constitution of the 
State of Hawai i, which states, “The legislature shall create 
counties, and may create other political subdivisions within the 
State, and provide for the government thereof.  Each political 
subdivision shall have and exercise such powers as shall be 
conferred under general laws. ”  (Emphasis added.)  Thus, 
pursuant to the Hawai i Constitution, a county’s powers are 
limited to those conferred by the legislature under general 
laws.  The legislature has outlined the “General powers and 
limitations of the counties” in HRS § 46 -1.5 (2012) .  HRS       
§ 46-1.5(13) (2012) provides  
Each county shall have the power to enact ordinances deemed 
necessary to protect health, life, and property, and to 
preserve the order and security of the county and its 
inhabitants on any subject or matter not inconsistent with, 
or tending to defeat, the intent of any state statute where 
the statute does not disclose an express or implied intent  
that the statute shall be exclusive or uniform throughout 
the State. . . .  
 ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
25 
 As noted earlier, we need not address whether Chapter 329 
discloses a “comprehensive statutory scheme disclosing an 
express or implied intent to be exclusive or uniform throughout 
the state,” the first Richardson  prong, which parallels this 
subsection.  Even assuming Chapter 329 does not disclose such a 
scheme, subsection (13) authorizes county ordinances “to protect 
health, life, and property, and to preserve the order and 
security of the county and its inhabitants” as long as they are 
“not inconsistent wi th, or [do not] tend[] to defeat, the intent 
of [Chapter 329].”  As we held earlier, the purported “advisory 
ordinances” in the LLEP conflict with Chapter 329 and do not 
meet this standard.   
Moreover, Section 14- 104, which the dissent posits can 
remain on the books as an advisory statement expressing the will 
of the people, is not merely advisory.  Rather, it states “that 
the provision shall be implemented into law by whichever 
government branch or official who has the power to implement  
it. . . .”  (Emphasis added).  It also states that “the council 
shall take all actions within their power to work with those 
branches of government to express the will of the people and 
encourage, support, and request the implementation of those 
provisions.”  Id.  (emphasis added).  Therefore, the section is 
actually mandatory, not advisory.   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
26 
 As noted earlier, state law places responsibility for 
enforcing penal laws of statewide application on the attorney 
general.  See  HRS §§ 26- 7, 28-2, 28-2.5.  Primary responsibility 
for initiating and conducting criminal prosecutions within 
counties is further delegated to county prosecuting attorneys.  
See Amemiya , 63 Haw. at 427, 629 P.2d at 1129.  Not only does 
the LLEP conflict with state law, the mandatory language of 
Section 14- 104 creates confusion regarding the duties of 
government officials.  
Finally, in HRS § 50- 15 (2012), the legislature clearly 
provided that “[n]otwithstanding the provisions of this chapter 
[governing Charter Commissions], there is expressly reserved to 
the legislature the power to enact all laws of general 
application throughout the State on matters of concern and 
interest . . ., and neither a charter nor ordinances adopted 
under a charter shall be in conflict therewith .”  (Emphasis 
added).  As the “advisory ordinances” contained in the LLEP 
conflict with State law, they cannot stand.  
V.  Conclusion 
 The LLEP  is preempted solely  because it “conflicts with 
state law. ”  We need not, and do not, address whether the LLEP 
“covers the same subject matter embraced within a comprehensive 
state statutory scheme disclosing an express or implied intent 
to be exclusive and uniform throughout the state . . . .”   ***     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER     *** 
 
27 
 Richardson, 76 Hawai i at 62, 868 P.2d at 1209.  We also hold 
that the entire LLEP is invalidated because it conflicts with, 
and is therefore preempted by, state law.  With 
these  
clarifications made, we affirm the ICA’s judgment on appeal, 
which affirmed the circuit court’s Final Judgment.  
Michael D. Ruggles,   
Rev. Nancy Waite Harris,  
Kenneth V. Miyamoto- Slaughter,
Wendy Tatum, David Tatum, 
and Robert S. Murray  
petitioners pro se 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
          
Michael J. Udovic 
for respondents      
 
 
 
 
 
 
