***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---oOo--- 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
  
vs. 
 
KIMBERLY J. UDO, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-16-0000793 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000793; CRIMINAL NO. 14-1- 1199) 
 
DECEMBER 16, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I. Introduction 
 This appeal arises from Kimberly J. Udo’s (“Udo”) 
manslaughter conviction in violation of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes 
(“HRS”) § 707-702(1)(a) (2014),1 for which she was sentenced to 
twenty years of incarceration with credit for time served, to 
                     
1 HRS § 707- 702(1)(a)  provides as follows: “ (1) A person commits  
the offense of manslaughter if: (a) The person recklessly causes the death of  
another person . . . .” Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000793
16-DEC-2019
09:11 AM***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
2 
 run concurrently with any other term served.  Udo’s appeal is 
based on the deputy prosecuting attorney’s (“DPA”)  cross-
examination of the defense’s only  witness, pathologist James 
Navin, M.D. (“Dr. Navin”) and closing argument references to Dr. 
Navin’s testimony .  Udo alleges the DPA ’s cross- examination of 
Dr. Navin regarding his testimony as a defense expert in  two of 
the most well-publicized and notorious murder trials in Hawaiʻ i 
within the last decade involving 
defendants Kirk Lankford 
(“Lankford”) and Matthew Higa (“Higa”), and closing arguments 
about that testimony, amounted to prosecutorial misconduct 
affecting her substantial rights for which this court should 
take plain error notice.  
 
 In its June 29, 2018 Summary Disposition Order (“SDO”), the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) affirmed Udo’s conviction, 
ruling that the DPA’s 
cross-examination of Dr. Navin with 
respect to his testimony in the Lankford and Higa
 trials was not 
improper because it was (1) relevant to establishing Dr. Navin’s 
defense bias; 
and (2) did not “rise to the level of misconduct 
in [State v. ]Rogan[, 91 Hawaiʻi 405, 984 P.2d 1231 (1999)] .”  
See State v. Udo, CAAP-16-000793, at 5 -6, 7 (App. June 30, 2018) 
(SDO).  The ICA also held that the DPA’s references to these 
cases in his closing argument were within the bounds of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
3 
 reasonable inference that a prosecutor may draw from the 
testimony.  Udo, SDO at 8-9.   
In Udo’s case, as argued by Udo on appeal, the DPA 
improperly referenced Dr. Navin’s testimony in the Lankford and 
Higa trials, which affected Udo’s substantial right to a fair 
trial.  Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment on appeal, 
which had affirmed Udo’s conviction  and sentence, and we remand 
this case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
II. Background  
A. Factual Summary2 
 On the night of July 20, 2014, Sandra Wollaston 
(“Wollaston”) slept on the sidewalk fronting 1150 Bishop Street, 
along with Charles Kingston 
(“Kingston”) , Mimi Clinton 
(“Clinton”), Richard Kazmierski (“Kazmierski”), and Robert Supee  
(“Supee”).  Sometime early the next morning , on July 21, 2014, 
Wollaston, Kingston, Clinton, and Kazmierski awoke. 
 Around 4:20 a.m., Udo was walking her dog along Bishop 
Street and began slamming the dog against a wall.  Wollaston 
then called 
out to Udo , cursing, asking what she was doing to 
the dog.  Udo responded  by cursing back, indicating it was none 
of Wollaston’s business.  Udo then approached  Wollaston.  
                     
2 This brief factual background is compiled from the testimony adduced at 
trial.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
4 
 (continued. . .)   Wollaston  stood up and she and Udo began fighting.  At some 
point, they fell over Clinton.  While Wollaston remained on the 
ground, Udo kicked Wollaston in the face and stomped on her head 
and neck multiple times, walking away and then returning three 
to four times to repeatedly strike Wollaston.  Wollaston lay 
motionless after the final 
impact and Udo walked away towards 
Union Mall.  
 Kingst on called 911 and Wollaston was taken by ambulance to 
Queen’s Medical Center  (“QMC”).  At 4:40 a.m., while in the 
ambulance, Wollaston lost her pulse, her heart stopped beating 
on its own, and she no longer breathed spontaneously.  She w as 
declared dead at QMC  at 5:42 a.m.,  and her body was taken to the 
Honolulu medical examiner for an autopsy.    
 Mea nwhile, Honolulu Police Dep artment ( “HPD”) officers 
apprehended Udo,  and Kingston positively identified Udo  in a 
field show-up as the woman he saw assault Wollaston.  Udo was 
arrested and taken into custody.   
B. Circuit Court Proceedings    
 On July 24, 2014, a grand jury issued a bench warrant and 
indicted Udo for Second Degree Murder in violation of HRS §§ 
707-701.5 (2014)3 and 706-656 (2014).4  The indictment alleged 
                     
3 HRS § 707- 701.5 provides as follows:  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
5 
 that on July 21, 2014, Udo intentionally or knowingly kille d 
Wollaston.5  
 1. Evidentiary Portion of J ury Trial  
 A jury trial was held between February 22 and March 3, 2016 
before the circuit court.6   
  a. State’s Witnesses in Its Case-In-Chief 
 In summary, various witnesses called by the State testified 
as follows regarding evidence relevant to the questions on 
certiorari. 
                                                                  
(. . . continued)  
Murder in the second degree.   (1) Except as provided in 
section 707 -701, a person commits the offense of murder in 
the second  degree if the person intentionally or knowingly 
causes the death of another person.   
 
(2)  Murder in the second degree is a felony for which the 
defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in 
section 706 -656.   
 
4 HRS § 706- 656 provides in pertinent part as follows:  
Terms of imprisonment for first and second degree murder 
and attempted first and second degree murder.  
. . . .  
(2) Except as provided in section 706 -657, pertaining to  
enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons  
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second  
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with  
possibility of parole.  
 
5  The indictment stated:  
 
On or about July 21, 2014, in the City and County of 
Honolulu, State of Hawaii ̒, KIMBERLY J. UDO did 
intentionally or knowingly cause the death of Sandra Lee 
Wollaston thereby committing the offense of Murder in the 
Second Degree, in violation of Sections 707 -701.5 and 706-
656 of the Hawaii ̒ Revised Statutes.  
 
6  The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
6 
 Paramedic Kelly Kihe (“Kihe”) responded to a 911 call for 
assistance at 1150 Bishop Street on July 21, 2014.   When Kihe  
arrived on the scene, Wollaston was lying motionless on her 
back; Wollaston could not speak and her vital signs were weak.  
At 4:40 a.m. , while in the ambulance, Wollaston lost her pulse, 
her heart stopped beating on its own,  and she no longer breathed 
spontaneously.  The paramedics used a defibrillator on Wollaston 
and also administered four doses of epinephrine in attempts to 
resuscitate her. 
Kihe’s clinical impression was that Wollaston had a closed 
head injury and that Wollaston was deceased upon arrival at  QMC. 
Kihe did not have any information indicating that Wollaston was 
experiencing a heart attack.   
 Charlotte Carter, the  medical examiner’s investigator who 
investigated Wollaston’s death , spoke with Wollaston’s father , 
who stated Wollaston had a history of prior use of marijuana and 
methamphetamines.  ( The jury was instructed, however, not to 
consider Wollaston’s father’ s comments for the truth of the 
matter asserted.)   
 HPD Officer Jarre tt De Soto (“Officer De Soto”) , approached 
Udo on Hotel Street after hearing a suspect description on the 
morning of July 21, 2014.   When he told Udo she was a suspect in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
7 
 an assault case, Udo stated,  “[S]he hit me first so I went pound 
her.”  
 Using photographic exhibits, 
Toy Stech  (“Stech”) , an 
evidence specialist with the City and County of Honolulu,  
pointed out possible injuries to Udo’s upper right c heek, right 
hand, and right foot on July 21, 2014.   
 HPD Detective Peter Boyle (“Boyle”) went to HPD’s Central 
Receiving Division to process Udo.   While informing Udo that 
they would be gathering evidence from her, Udo uttered that “she 
gets beat up all the time in town and the first time she fights 
back she gets arrested.”  
 According to HPD Detective Daniel Tsue (“Detective Tsue”) , 
the lead detective in Udo’s case, on the morning of July 21, 
2014, Kingston appeared to understand his questioning, offered 
responsive answers, and was understandable.  
Kazmierski, 
however, was not responsive to questions,  and Detective Tsue  did 
not interview Supee because Supee was asleep during the 
incident.  Detective Tsue confirmed there were no external 
surveillance camera
s near the scene of the incident.   
Kingston  testified as the only eyewitness.  Kingston had 
lived in Hawai ‘i 
for twelve years and had been on and off the 
streets.  When on the streets, he slept by a Bible store at the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
8 
 corner of Adams and Bishop Streets.  He had known Wollaston for 
a couple years.  
 At around 10:00 p.m. on the night of July 20, 2014, 
Kingston, Wollaston, Kazmierski, Supee, and Clinton went to 
sleep in front of Ninja Sushi
 after drinking together.  At 
around 2:45 a.m., Kingston
, Wollaston, an d Kazmierski awoke and 
had shots of vodka.   
At around 4:20 a.m., Kingston saw a woman slamming her d og 
against a wall.  Kingston identified Udo as the woman he saw 
that morning.  According to Kingston, Woll aston was also awake 
and said something to Udo.  Udo then responded to Wollaston from 
about three feet away, cursing, then approached Wollaston, who 
had been sitting down.  Kingston told Wollaston, “Don’t do it, 
[Wollaston].”  Wollaston responded , “No, Chaz, s tay out of it.  
This is mine.”  Then Wollaston “ stood up and they scrapped, 
pulled hair, kicked, punched, whatever.  They fell over 
[Clinton].  And it got out of hand.”  Kingston called 911, and 
an ambulance arrived within a few minutes.   
Kingston was a couple of feet from Wollaston during th e 
incident.  When Wollaston and Udo fell over Clinton, Wollaston’s 
head hit the ground,  and Udo kicked Wollaston in the face until 
Kingston pulled her away.  Udo left then  returned three to four 
times, and each time,  she kicked Wollaston in the head and neck ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
9 (continued. . .)  
 area, “stomp[ed]” on Wollaston, and uttered phrases such as 
“I’ll kill you.”   After the final kick, Wollaston had “a death 
stare,” was motionless, and was lifeless.  
According to Kingston, during the incident, Clinton was 
present, Supee was passed out, and Kazmierski was at a store 
getting Wollaston a sandwich.  Udo  then left in the direction of 
Union Mall.  Kingston tried to care for Wollaston, but she 
remained motionless and was not breathing or speaking.  After 
HPD arrived, Kingston wrote
 a statement and identified Udo in a 
field show-up near Union Mall.
 
 On cross -examination, Kingston testified he had consumed a 
few shots or a half-pint of vodka the night prior to trial.  He 
stated he was not intoxicated
 throughout the period of July 20 
to July 21, 2014, but had dru nk about a pint of vodka on July 
20, 2014 and less than half a pint the morning of the incident.  
 Kingston also testified that when Wollaston saw Udo abusing 
the dog, she cursed out Udo, asking what she was doing with the 
dog.  According to Kingston, 
Wollaston voluntarily entered into 
the fight with Udo despite Kingston trying to stop her.   
 As its final witness,7 the State presented Christopher 
Happy, M.D. (“Dr. Happy”), the chief medical exa miner for the 
                     
7 Before presenting its final witness, the State also presented the 
following witnesses: (1) Veronica De Mello, a police evidence specialist for 
HPD, who photographed and diagrammed the crime scene ; (2) HPD Sergeant Eric ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
10 
 City and County of Honolulu.  The court qualified Dr. Happy as 
“a medical expert with  a specialization in forensic pathology.”   
 According to Dr. Happy , Wollaston was pronounced dead at 
5:42 in the morning on July 21, 2014.  Dr. Happy performed 
Wollaston’s autopsy on July 21, 2014.  
 Dr. Happy  described the physiology of a human spine, neck, 
and brain.  He explained that “t he brainstem regulates heart 
rate and respiratory rate ,” and injury to the brainstem can 
cause death.  
Before and during Wollaston’s  autopsy, Dr. Happy noticed 
several injuries consistent with a kick or a punch on 
Wollaston’s head, face , and brain: (1) two contusions on the 
right side of her face; (2)  an abrasion and a contusion in the 
external left occipital region of Wollaston’s head; (3) a 
subscalp hemorrhage in the r ight occipital subscalp area; (4) a 
                                                                  
(. . . continued)  
Fong, who responded to the scene  and noted that Clinton, Kazmierski, and 
Kingston were all present, but Supee remained asleep; (3) HPD Corporal Arnold 
Sagucio, who went to  the crime scene, and testified that Kazmierski was 
“extremely intoxicated” when he interacted with him , Supee remained asleep, 
and there were no  surveillance cameras in the crime scene area; (4) HPD 
Officer Brian Goda, who placed an all -points bulletin wi th Udo’s description, 
took Kingston to the field show -up, and could not say “how intoxicated 
[Kingston] was” the morning of July 21, 2014; (5) HPD Officer Dustin Hao, who 
was on duty at QMC’s  Emergency Room and confirmed that Wollaston’s body was 
not tampered with between the time it was at QMC
 and the time it was 
transported in a sealed body bag  to the medical examiner’s office; and (6 ) 
HPD evidence specialist, Doryn Matsuda, who photographed Wollaston’s body and 
swabbed her hands for evidence.  None of those witnesses  who were cross
-
examined about drug paraphernalia testified to seeing any drug paraphernalia 
around the crime scene or in Wollaston’s belongings.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
11 
 two-by-one-and-one- half-inch abraded red and purple contusion 
with associated swelling in the occipital parietal scalp above 
Wollaston’s left ear; (5) a subscalp hemorrhage on the left 
occipital region more extensive than the exterior injury ; (6) a 
“two-inch horizontally oriented fracture extending from the 
posterior part of the temporal bone to about the mid portion of 
the left temporal bone ” of Wollaston’s skull ; (7) four subscalp 
hemorrhages on the top of the head, indicating four different 
impacts; (8) bleeding in multiple locations between the dura and 
the surface of the brain -- subdural and subara chnoid 
hemorrhages;8 and (9) “a very small four millimeter l aceration” 
on Wollaston’s brainstem, along with hemorrhaging.   A tissue 
slide was made of Wollaston’s brain stem. 
 At the completion of Dr. Happy’s testimony the State 
rested.  Udo moved for, but was denied, a judgment of acquittal. 
b. Defendant’s Witness  
 Udo then called Dr. Navin  as her only witness.  Dr. Navin 
stated that he had testified “as an expert in anatomical, 
                     
8 Dr. Happy testified that subdural hemorrhages are caused “ [w]hen the 
brain moves relative to the dura, usually due to an acceleration and a sudden 
deceleration . . . those bridging veins tear and . . . they cause subdural 
hemorrhage.  Subarachnoid hemorrhage . . . is usually caused by a direct blow 
to the surface of  the brain with deformation of either the skull or an impact 
of the brain on the insides of the skull.”  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
12 
 clinical pathology ” for the State and for the defense over 100 
times each.9  
 On direct examination, Dr. Navin testified
 he had reviewed 
all the reports in the case and the slides that were taken by 
Dr. Happy.  When he reviewed Dr. Happy’s autopsy re port, he 
noticed indications of previous heart damage.  Those indicators 
included the presence of boxcar nuclei, which could increase the 
risk of a heart attack, as well as areas of fibrosis.  Dr. Navin 
also testified that Wollaston’s blood alcohol level was 0.278 
and there was evidence of marijuana in high levels, which could 
increase the risk of heart attack.  Citing an article in 
National Geographic, he testified that marijuana use “can cause 
doubling of the heart rate and greatly increases the risk of 
heart attacks,” and given Wollaston’s heart condition, he opined 
that the potential impact of combining marijuana and alcohol 
consumption is death. 
                     
9  Although not raised by the defense, during the February 25, 2016 
questioning of Dr. Navin, the DPA also inserted the Higa case into his voir 
dire questioning regarding Dr. Navin’s qualifications:  
 
Q. Okay.  Do you remember testifying on January  26, 2010, 
just down the hall, in the case of State of  Hawaii versus 
Matthew Higa?  
A. Of what?  
Q. Matthew Higa was the defendant.  Do you remember that 
case? 
A. Yes. 
 
  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
13 
  Upon his request, the medical e xaminer’s offic e resliced 
paraffin slides of Wollaston’s heart , and Dr. Navin discovered  
that contraction band necrosis was present in Wollaston’s heart.  
Dr. Navin explained that contraction band necrosis was not a 
specific diagnosis of a heart attack and had many possible 
causes. 
Dr. Navin testified that in forming his opinions , he also 
considered Wollaston’s long history of alcoholism, drug abuse, 
which included methamphetamines and marijuana, and substandard 
living conditions.  It was Dr. Navin’s theory that Wollaston’s 
death resulted from 
the mixture of alcohol, marijuana, 
Wollaston’s pre -existing heart condition, and the physical 
activity of the fight.  Dr. Navin testified that Wollaston could 
not speak when police arrived because a myocardial infarction 
can have a similar effect on the vocal chords as a brainstem 
injury.  
 Dr. Navin opined that  Dr. Happy failed to examine sections 
of the brain and that Wollaston’s brain was not actually 
swollen.  According to Dr. Navin, however, Wollaston’s heart was  
abnormally enlarged by fifty percent.   Dr. Navin testified that 
the autopsy report did not note “contraction band necrosis and 
other cellular changes indicative of myocardial infarction 
present in both the o riginal slides and the recuts.”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
14 
  Dr. Navin testified that the presence of wavy fibers, 
although a non-specific finding, in conjunction with the 
contraction band necrosis found in a whole area of Wollaston’s 
heart just “four hours old” supported his conclu sion.  Dr. Navin 
also opined that the contraction band necrosis was more likely 
from a heart attack than from epinephrine or the external 
cardiac massage because the bands were not isolated, and 
Wollaston had granules throughout her heart and edema caused by 
cellular injury that could have appeared hours prior to the 
fight.  Dr. Navin also explained that if Wollaston only 
exhibited the granules and contraction band necrosis, it would 
be consistent with external massage.  The edema and holes 
indicating cellular injury could have occurred prior to the 
fight and were independent of any blunt trauma.    
 As to Wollaston’s head injuries, Dr. Navin testi fied the 
abrasion on the back of Wollaston’s head was  more likely caused 
by hitting her head when she fell, but could have been from a 
kick.  Dr. Navin did not believe Wollaston’s head injuries were 
fatal because they consisted of “just a bruise” in the scalp  and 
“surface hemorrhages”  on the brain.  According to Dr. Navin, the 
injury to the brainstem could have contributed to her death, but 
that was unclear to him because he did not have cut sections of 
the brain to review.  The tear in the brainstem could have been ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
15 
 the primary cause of death instead of the heart attack, he 
acknowledged, or “it coul d add more stress to an already 
existing stressful situation. ”   
 According to Dr. Navin, without a heart attack, it was 
entirely possible that Wollaston would have survived the left 
temporal bone fracture .  As to Wollaston’s vertebral artery 
injury in the  neck, he stated it was not typically a fatal 
injury but could be depending on the circumstances, and he 
shared a story of a woman who died from such an injury.  In his 
opinion, Wollaston’s injurie s to her medulla were survivable.  
 On cross -examination, Dr. Navin agreed  his experience in 
cytopathology, pap smears, and rabies did not relate to 
myocardial infarction or the kinds of injuries sustained by 
Wollaston during the July 21, 2014 incident.  Regarding his 
experience as an expert witness, Dr. Navin stated h e had 
previously testified for the public defender ’s office  on death 
cases but  also for the Honolulu p rosecutor’ s office , primarily 
in sexual assault cases.  He could not remember if he had 
testified for the prosecutor’s office within the past five 
years. 
 The DPA then questioned Dr. Navin regarding his testimony 
in two murder cases on behalf of the defense:  the Lankford trial 
in 2008 and the Higa  trial in 2010.   In response to the DPA ’s ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
16 
 questions, Dr. Navin testified the Lankford trial involved a 
missing Japanese student, Masumi Watanabe, whose disappearance 
resulted in a large-scale police investigation.  Dr. Navin 
testified he could not recall his fee schedule in the Lankford 
case.  
 The DPA then began questioning Dr. Navin about a 
hypothetical question asked by Lankford’s defense counsel  during 
that trial: 
Q. Do you recall [defense counsel]  posing a 
hypothetical to you: A vehicle travelling 40 miles an  
hour with a woman, five feet two inches tall, 100 pounds, 
seated in the right front passenger seat.   Thereafter the  
woman opens the door, falls out of the right front  
passenger seat and strikes her head against a rock that
’s 
on the ground.  Do you remember that hypothetical being  put 
to you? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And then you testified, based on that  hypothetical, that 
the woman based on your training and  experience would be 
dead under those circumstances, right?  
A. She could be, yes.  
Q. She could be.  But in your testimony on that  day, you 
would agree that you speculated about what could  have 
happened based on that hypothetical, right?  
A. I don’ t remember.   
To refresh Dr. Navin’s memory, the State turned Dr. Navin’s 
attention to a binder including the transcript of his testimony 
in the Lankford trial and asked him to read a number of lines.10  
                     
10 The State asked , “would reviewing your testimony of March 20th, 2008 
refresh your recollection as to what you testified to in another case?”  
Udo’s counsel promptly objected and requested to approach the bench.  Udo’s 
counsel argued the State was offering a different case to refresh Dr. Navin’s 
recollection, and requested the court to compel the State to provide Dr. 
Navin with the document related to the hypothetical to refresh his 
recollection.  The court declined the request because no rule of evidence 
applied to compel the document to be provided.  Udo’s counsel insisted the 
(continued. . .) ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
17 
 The following line of inquiry between the DPA and Dr. Navin then 
transpired.  We refer to the underlined passage that Udo raises 
on appeal as the “ Lankford  Question” : 
Q. [DPA] Okay.  So you recall the defense attorney giving 
you a hypothetical example of a woman, five feet two inches 
tall, a hundred pounds, falling out of the front seat-- 
A. [DR. NAVIN] Jumping out.  
Q. Jump -- jump, that’s right, jumping out of the front 
seat of the car and striking her head against a rock?  
A. Yes.  
Q. Okay.  And you testified that based under those 
circumstances, that hypothetical, the woman would be dead?  
A. She could be.  
Q. She could be.  But isn’t it true that Mr. Wilkerson[, 
the defense attorney in Lankford,] asked you to speculate 
about what could have caused her death?  
[Udo’s counsel] : Objection, your honor.  Lack of 
foundation.   
The Court: All right.  Well, overruled at this time.  
Q. [DPA] In fact, turn to pages 75, doctor.  Lines 4 and 5, 
the defense attorney asked you, “Could you tell us the 
things that could have happened?” That was the question 
that was put to you, right?  
A. Yes.  
Q. And then your response, you said, “She could have torn 
blood vessels.  She could have torn the brainste m.”  So you 
were speculating as to what could have happened based on a 
hypothetical given to you by the defense attorney, right?  
A. Well, there are a whole list of possibilities, but yeah.  
Q. Well, based on your training and experience, you know 
that an injury to the brainstem can cause death?  
A. It can, yes.  
Q. And that’s what you testified to in the Lankford case on 
March 20th, 2008, that damage to the brainstem can cause 
death?  
A. Yes, depending on the severity.  
Q. Isn’t it true, Dr. Navin, that wit h regards to the 
hypothetical that was given to you in the Lankford murder 
case, the facts of the hypothetical came directly from the 
defendant?  He told you his version of the events?  
A. Yes.  
. . . .  
Q. So to be clear, on March 20th, 2008, in that murder 
trial you testified to a hypothetical based on information 
provided to you by the accused, right?  
A. Yes, he told me what --   
                                                                  
(. . . continued)  
court was biased in its decision -making, to which the court responded it was 
not making “any decisions based upon any sort of bias for or against anyone.”   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
18 
 Q. He believed happened?  
A. What he said happened.  
Q. And you would agree that based on all of the information 
that you reviewed in the Lankford case there was no 
independent corroboration of defendant Lankford’s version 
of the events?  
A. That’s correct.  
Q. Okay.  
A. Now what he said actually was that she jumped out of the 
car.  She didn’t speak English and he didn’t spea k 
Japanese, and she was frightened and she jumped and hit her 
head and when he got -- he stopped the truck, got out, that 
she had no  pulse, no respirations.  
Q. And that’s what she -- that’s what he told you?  
A. Yes.  
Q. And you took it at face value, right?  
A. He’s the only witness.  
Q. So in this case, in that case, sorry, the Lankford case, 
you took the word of the murder  -- the accused murderer 
without any independent corroboration to support his 
version of events; that’s what you did, right?   
A. There wasn’t anybody left.   
 As to Higa trial, the following line of inquiry occurred; 
the underlined portions that Udo raises on appeal are referred 
to as the “Higa Questions” :   
Q.  Now do you remember on January 26, 2010 testifying in 
the case of State of Hawaii  versus Matthew Higa?   It’s case 
number 08 -1-0132.  It’s that other murder case.  
A. The kid off the bridge?  
Q. The kid off the bridge.   Do you remember that?  
A. Yes.  
Q. There was an allegation that Matthew Higa threw an 
infant off of the bridge?  
A. Yes.  
Q. And this was on the H -1 overpass, right?  
A. Yes.  
Q. And you were retained by the defense in that case?  
A. Yes.  
Q. Right?  And that defense attorney was Randy Oyama; do 
you remember him?  
A. Yes.  
Q. And what was your retention schedule in that case, how 
much were you paid?  
A. Oh, I don’t  know.  
Q. All right.  But you recall Mr. Oyama calling you and 
agreeing to take the case?  
A. Yes.  
Q. Isn’t it true that in the Matthew Higa  case you 
testified as an expert witness that the infant was either ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
19 
 unconscious or dead before it struck the H -1 freeway?  You 
testified --  
A. I didn’t say that.  
Q. You didn’t?  
A. No.  
Q. Turn to page -- turn to Exhibit 86.  
A. Oh, oh.   Wait, wait.  No.  Yes, I did say that.   I’m 
sorry.  
Q. Okay.  
A. It was the opposite part that I -- oh, no.  Right, I 
did.  
Q. Okay.  Let’s take our time.  I don’t want to --  
A. Yeah.  No, no.  
Q. I want to make sure we understand each other.  
A. There were two aspects to  it.  One of them is that they 
asked if she -- if the kid was dead and I said probably.  
And the reason the kid was probably dead is when -- when he 
threw the body, number one, he carried the body underneath 
his coat down to the bridge and two people saw him walk by 
and they didn’t see the kid.   Okay? Then he gets down to 
the bridge and he throws the kid off and from all the -- 
what the witnesses saw, the kid’s arms, they never moved, 
nothing ever moved and there was no yelling or screaming.  
So I said, wel l, there’s good chanc e he was already 
unconscious or dead  -- when the body was going through the 
air.  
Q. So the purpose of your testimony, as you think back, was 
to say that the defendant, Matthew Higa, couldn’t be guilty 
of murder because the baby he threw off the overpass was 
already dead when it hit the pavement; that was the purpose 
of your testimony, wasn’t it?   
A. No, it wasn’t.  The purpose of the testimony was 
establishing what I thought the condition of the child was, 
if he was killed before by Matthew Higa or somebody else 
and that -- that would explain it.  If he was not, then --  
Q. You recall that the injuries obviously to the infant 
were devastating?  
A. The what?  
Q. The injuries to the infant were devastating, remember?  
A. The brain’s out i n the middle of the highway.  
Q. That’s right.  And you testified as an expert that you 
couldn’t determine whether the intracranial injuries you 
saw to the infant were caused before it was thrown off the 
highway overpass or when it hit the ground, that’s w hat you 
testified to?     
A. That’s correct.  
Q. You also testified as an expert witness in that case 
that you couldn’t rule out if the infant’s skull was 
fractured before it was thrown off the overpass or when it 
impacted the freeway, you testified to that, right?  
A. Correct.  
Q. But wasn’t the purpose of your testimony to present 
evidence in that case that Matthew Higa wasn’t guilty of 
murder because the infant could have been already dead 
before he threw it off the overpass?   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
20 
 A. No.  Because he could have killed him before.  
 With respect to the instant case, Dr. Navin testified he 
had not determined his fee schedule yet , but had received one 
advance check of $5,000 and was to receive a negotiated amount 
after testifying. 
 Regarding the materials he consulted prior to testifying, 
Dr. Navin testified he had consulted Wikipedia.  He also 
acknowledged that none of Wollaston’s charts contained proof of 
methamphetamine in Wollaston’s body, and that the source of that 
information came from Woll aston’s father’s  statement, as 
recorded by the medical examin er’s office, which Dr. Navin had  
not corroborated.  When the prosecution likened Dr. Navin’s 
failure to confirm t he information to his testimony in Lankford, 
defense counsel objected  for mischaracterization of the 
evidence.  Before the bench, the State contended that  the “offer 
of proof demonstrates that [Dr. Navin’s]  methodology is to 
accept at face value those assertions that seem to support his 
theories and conclusions without verifying the underlying.  
That’s exactly the point that’s being made  . . . . That’s what 
he did in Lankford .  That’s what he’s doing here.”  The court 
overruled the objection.  
 Dr. Navin also acknowledged on cross -examination that he 
made changes to his expert report up until the morning of his ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
21 
 trial testimony, and previously made changes to the report after 
speaking with defense counsel about the report.  He also 
acknowledged that he referenced an article in National 
Geographic, which
 is not a scientific or peer-reviewed  journal.  
Additionally, he acknowledged that Wollaston’s blood contained 
an inactive form of tetrahydrocannabinol (“ THC”) from marijuana, 
which does not have pharmacological effects.  Further, w hen the 
State clarified that Dr. Navin did not consider statements made 
by Kingston in forming his opinion because Kingston did not 
state that Wollaston was only blocking punches after she fell , 
defense counsel objected, but was overruled.  
 
Dr. Navin also acknowledged that acute subdural hemorrhages 
are life-threatening, Wollaston’s injuries could have been 
caused by a direct impact such as a stomp, and the subdural 
hemorrhaging was not a direct result of myocardial infarction.   
Regarding Wollaston’s brainstem, Dr. Navin testified that  he did 
not see the slides of Wollaston’s brainstem “until after [his]  
report went out.”  Dr. Navin agreed that a t ear to the brainstem 
could impact someo ne’s ability to speak, but was not necessarily  
the reason that Wollaston could not speak the morning of July 
21, 2014.  As to the vertebral artery injury, blunt force trauma 
to the back of the neck or side o
f the neck could have caused 
such an injury. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
22 
  Dr. Navin agreed that nothing in the record from Kings ton’s 
statements or other witnesses indicated that Wollaston 
experienced any of the tell -tale sign s of a heart attack , such 
as dizziness, chest pains, or shortness of breath,  on the 
morning of July 21, 2014.  He also admitted that there was no 
evidence that Wollaston had hardening of the arteries, which 
could cause a heart attack.  
 Further, Dr. Navin acknowledged that epinephrine, which 
Wollaston received, can cause contraction band necrosis, and 
that he did not know the dosage of epinephrine that was 
administered to Wollaston.  He opined, however, that the 
defibrillation and epinephrine that Wollaston received was less 
likely than the myocardial infarction  to have caused Wollaston’s 
contraction band necrosis, “ because one part of the heart has 
it, the other part doesn’t.”  
 
On re-direct, Dr. Navin testified that it was possible that 
Wollaston would have survived the head injury if she had not had 
a heart attack.  He f urther testified he did not receive any 
instructions from defense counsel when he was retained other 
than to look at the case and share his opinion.  
  c. State’s Rebuttal 
Testimony from Dr. Happy 
 On rebuttal
 direct examination, Dr. Happy testified that 
the weight of Wollaston’s heart  was forty -two percent above ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
23 
 normal, not fifty percent above normal as testified by Dr. 
Navin.  Also, according to Dr. Happy, Wollaston’s heart did not 
exhibit heart disease from alcoholism
.  Dr. Happy determined 
this by making a new tissue slide from the slice of Wollaston’s 
heart that was retained in a stock jar.  Dr. Happy also 
testified that Woll aston had  hypertension, which can make the 
heart get bigger and thicker.  Wollaston did not have 
atherosclerosis, however, which is the underlying cause of most 
heart attacks. 
 
Regarding the impacts of marijuana on the heart, according 
to Dr. Happy, studies indicated the connection between marijuana 
use and sudden cardiac death was rare  and usually associated 
with atherosclerosis.  Further, the amount of  an inactive form 
of THC in Wollaston’s blood, as reflected by the toxicology 
report, was very low, and “to think that this inactive 
metabolite would have caused her to have a heart attack ” was 
“erroneous.” 
 Regarding Wollaston’s heart , Dr. Happy  acknowledged that he 
had not previously noticed the contraction band necrosis or wavy 
fibers.  He explained epin ephrine can cause contraction bands, 
and opined that Wollaston “ had four sources of possibilities for 
her contraction bands.”  He explained: 
She had a fight where her epinephrine was released from her 
adrenal gland.  She had an intracranial hemorrhage which 
resulted in more epinephrine.  And then she was given six ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
24 
 different shots of epinephrine, four  . . . by the ambulance 
workers, and two by the emergency room doctors, and then 
she was defibrillated.  And so sure enough Dr. Navi n saw 
these contraction bands  . . . .    
In Dr. Happy’s medical opinion, the contraction bands Dr. Navin 
observed were not attri buted to myocardial infarction, and the 
timeline Dr. Navin presented for a myocardial infarction was 
correct for a person that is a therosclerotic, but Wollaston was 
not atherosclerotic.  As to the wavy fibers, according to Dr. 
Happy, they could arise with increased epinephrine and had been 
seen in cases of fatal cranial trauma as well as with heart 
attacks.  
 Dr. Happy  then desc ribed the symptoms of a heart attack and 
what happens to the heart during a myocardial infarction.  
According to him, in particular, a heart attack causes extreme 
pain, and if Wollaston did have a fatal heart attack four hours 
prior to the fight
, as Dr. Navin stated, “a significant amount 
of her heart muscle would have had to die.”  According to Dr. 
Happy, the tissue slides did not reflect that had happened.   
 Dr. Happy  had prepared a report on Wollaston’s  autopsy.  
During the autopsy he examined both Wo llaston’s heart and brain.  
He testified that, c ontrary to Dr. Navin’s testimony,  he did 
examine the cerebrum internally and documented it in the report, 
and a sample of Wollaston’s brainstem was placed in a tissue 
block and a slide was made of it.  He tes tified that the heart ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
25 
 and brainstem tissues that Dr. Happy used to form his opinion 
were available to Dr. Navin for inspection.   
 Dr. Happy opined that, to a reasonable degree of medical 
probability, Wollaston’s death was caused by “ [b]lunt force head 
and neck injury.”  The “mechanism of death” “was subarachnoid  
hemorrhage . . . around the brainstem.”   
 On rebuttal cross- examination, h e acknowledged h e did not 
take tissue slides of the cerebrum, besides the brainstem, to 
examine the brain at the cellular level.   
 On re -direct examination, Dr. Happy testified h e had seen  
the note in the investigator’s report that Wollaston had a 
history of methampheta mine use , which was based upon the 
statement by Wollaston’s father , but did not find any evidence 
in her medical record of such use.   
 On re -cross-examination, Dr. Happy stated that he received 
information about how Wollaston sustained her injuries from a 
detective attending the autopsy on the morning of July 21, 2014.   
2. Closing Arguments   
 During  the State’s closing argument , the DPA reminded the 
jurors they had the discretion to weigh the credibility of the 
experts, and should look to the expert s’ methodologies to make 
that determination.  The DPA detailed Dr. Happy’s  credentials 
and noted that Dr. Happy’s testimony was consistent with both ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
26 
 the medical literature and Kingston’s testimony of  the events on 
July 21, 2014.  
 The DPA  then attacked Dr. Navin’s methodology as outdated , 
highlighting that he did not have any ex perience “ conducting 
forensic brain consultations .”  The DPA then raised the issue of 
Dr. Navin’s self-interest as a paid defense witness, recalling 
his testimony in other cases.  For the purposes of this opinion, 
we refer to the first underlined remark as  the “Lankford  Closing 
Remark” and the second underlined remark a s the “Higa Closing 
Remark”:  
 And now I will explain why Dr. Navin's methodology, 
opinion, and analysis are not based on sound reasons, rest 
on faulty judgment, and are anchored on patently  false 
information.  
. . . .  
 Consider his testimony in other murder cases.   In the 
case of State of Hawaii versus Kirk Matthew Lankford, the 
case of the missing Japanese student, he testified just 
across the hall.   He gave an expert opinion as to the 
missing student’ s cause of death based on a scenario given 
to him by the defendant.  And in fact he admitted on cross -
examination that there was no in dependent corroboration for 
that version of events.  
 And so he testified to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty in another murder case that the missing student, 
Masumi Watanabe, essentially killed herself when she jumped 
out of a moving car that was traveling 30 to 40 miles per 
hour, struck her head on a rock, damaged her brainstem, and 
died.  That was his testimony in another murder trial just 
across the hall.  That is a clear cut example of his 
defense bias.  You see, if Dr. Navin does not give an 
opinion that’ s favorable to his paying client, his phone 
stops ringing.  That’s the way it works.  
. . . . 
 But it doesn’ t stop there.  Consider his testimony in 
the case of State of Hawaii versus Matthew Higa where an 
infant was launched off the H -1 overpass and was 
essentially smashed on the freeway.  He testified for the 
defense to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that he 
couldn’t tell whether the baby was dead or alive before it 
smashed onto the freeway.  The purpose of his testimony in ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
27 
 that case was to provide a defense for the accused murderer 
that a murder couldn’ t have happened based on throwing a  
baby off of an overpass because the baby could have been 
dead already .  That is the kind of  testimony that Dr. Navin 
has given in other murder trials.  That’s the kind of 
credibility that  he has held himself up to, a paid defense 
witness whose opinion is for sale.  That’s the way  
it is. 
Udo did not object during this portion of the DPA ’s closing 
argument referencing the Lankford and Higa trials.   
 The DPA  then explained why Dr. Happy’s co ntraction band 
necrosis analysis was the most plausible.   
 In Udo’s closing  argument , Udo described the case as 
between two experts, arguing that (1) the attacks on Dr. Navin’s 
reputation and credibility were not warranted; (2) Dr. Happy was 
self-interested; and (3) Kingston’s testimony was not credible .   
This was a mutual affray, Udo emphasized, and Udo never intended 
for Wollaston to die.  
 On rebuttal, the State reiterated that Dr. Navin’s 
testimony was “for sale” in Lankford and Higa, as well as “ when 
he testifies for the defense here.”  The State concluded by 
arguing the credible evidence demonstrated beyond a reasonable 
doubt that Wollaston’s death was due to a blunt force trauma to 
the head and neck, not a heart attack.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
28 
 3. Verdict and Sentence 
 The jury returned a verdict finding Udo “guilty of the 
included offense of Manslaughter[ ,] Recklessly Causing Death ” in 
violation of HRS § 707- 702(1)(a).11   
 A further jury hearing was held on the State’s request for 
an extended term sentence.  The jury could not reach a unanimous 
decision and the court declared a mistrial.  On September 13, 
2016, the circuit 
court then sentenced Udo to twenty years of 
incarceration with credit for time served, to run concurrently 
with any other term served.12  After the court announced Udo’s 
sentence, defense counsel made, and was granted,  a motion to 
withdraw and for appointment of appellate counsel.  Udo appealed 
to the ICA through substitute counsel.  
C. ICA Proceedings 
1. Opening Brief 
 On appeal , Udo asserted “multiple acts of misconduct” by 
the DPA.13  Udo contended that prosecutorial misconduct may 
                     
11 Udo filed, but was denied, a motion for new trial.  The circuit court’s 
denial of her motion for new trial was not raised on appeal to the ICA or to 
this court. 
 
12 The circuit court also required Udo to pay $10,000 restitution to the 
Crime Victim Compensation Commission, a $105 Crime Victim Compensation Fee,
 
and $100 Internet Crimes Against Children Fee.   
 
13  Udo also alleged on appeal that the failure of trial counsel to object 
to prosecutorial misconduct constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. 
The ICA ruled against Udo.  Based on our ruling vacating the conviction based 
on prosecutorial misconduct, we need not and do not further address the 
ineffective assistance allegation.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
29 
 (continued. . .)  provide grounds for a new trial if there is a reasonable 
possibility that the misconduct complained of might hav
e 
contributed to the conviction, and was necessary in her case 
based on the Lankford and Higa  questions and closing remarks,  
citing State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai ʻi 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1
215, 
1220 (1996).   
 Udo contended the Lankford Question and Higa Questions were 
irrelevant and prejudicial, and should have been excluded under 
the Hawaii ̒ Rules of Evidence (“ HRE”) Rules 401 (1980), 402 
(1980), and 403 (1980), because they did not elicit any 
admissible evidence that was relevant to Dr. Navin’s 
truthfulness, expert qualifications, or methodology.  Udo arg ued 
the Lankford Question misled the jury by suggesting Dr. Navin 
should have corroborated the facts of the hypothetical in that 
case but d id not.  The Higa Questions , Udo contended, also 
misled the jury.  Udo also argued that in the DPA ’s closing 
argument, the Lankford Closing Remark and Higa Closing Remark 
also misled the jury and “ unfairly exposed Dr. Navin to the 
scorn of the jury.”14 
                     
14 Udo alleged two additional instances of prosecutorial misconduct that 
are not raised in Udo’s application to this court: (1) “In his rebuttal 
argument, the DPA expressed his personal opinion that Dr. Navin was not 
credible;” and (2) “In his closing argument, the DPA attacked Dr. Navin’s 
integrity by making disparaging remarks about him.”  As to the second, Udo 
challenged the State’s following statements: Dr. Navin “is on the speed dial 
for the criminal defense bar here in Honolulu;” “if Dr. Navin does not give ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
30 
  The Lankford Closing Remark, Udo asserted, improperly 
indicated that Dr. Navin was supposed to corroborate the facts 
underlying the hypothetical posed to him in that case,  and the 
Higa Closing Remark misled  the jury about Dr. Navin’s purpose 
for testifying in that case.    
 The DPA’s misconduct, Udo argued, was not harmless because 
it undermined the credibility of Dr. Navin, Udo’s sole witness,  
whose testimony was essential to establish that Udo’s conduct 
was not the direct cause of Wollaston’s death.  The alleged 
misconduct, Udo argued, “aroused jury resentment and hostility 
toward [Dr. Navin].”  The instances of misconduct were not 
cured, Udo asserted, “because defense counsel did  not object to 
any of them,” and the misconduct warrant ed appellate review and 
a determination of mistrial because the DPA ’s conduct  deprived 
Udo of her right to a fair trial. 
                                                                  
(. . . continued)  
an opinion that’s favorable  to his paying client, his phone stops ringing.   
That’s the way it works.”; Dr. Navin is “a paid defense witness whose opinion 
is for sale.  That’s the way it is.”; and “When Dr. Navin stops presenting 
expert testimony favorable to the defense in criminal cases, his phone stops 
ringing.  Clearly he wants his phone to ring.”   
 Although the DPA was free to cross -examine Dr. Navin on his alleged 
defense bias and argue the same during closing, we note that these comments 
may have gone beyond the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the record.
 Udo also cited under this point of error portions of the DPA’s closing 
argument which stated that Dr. Navin “made up” the information that Wollaston 
was “unresponsive” and “just blocking punches” after she fell because that 
information was not included in Kingston’s testimony and Dr. Navin could not 
say at trial where in the record that information was provided.  That issue 
is not raised in Udo’s  application to this court.         ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
31 
 2. Answering B rief 
 The State responded that Udo waived any arguments related 
to the Lankford Question and Higa Question s because Udo did not 
object to those questions at trial.  Without conceding that 
arguments related to those cases were not waived, the State 
addressed the merits of Udo’s claims of prosecutorial 
misconduct. 
 First, the State argued that under HRE Rule 609.1 (1980), 
“[b]ias, interest,  or motive is always relevant” and “can be 
raised at any time by the witness’s testi mony or other 
evidence,” quoting State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 220, 738 P.2d 
812, 823 (1987).   The State maintained that it was not improper 
for the DPA to use the Lankford and Higa cases “to demonstrate 
Dr. Navin’s bias in cases involving the death of another 
person
,” especially given that Dr. Navin had only ever testified 
for the defense
 in cases involving death of another person.  The 
State asserted that Dr. Navin’s  testimony in those cases was 
clearly helpful to the defense, and was relevant and probative 
to a determination of Dr. Navin’s  credibility in the present 
case. 
 Lankford  was relevant, the State argued, because in that 
case, Dr. Navin testified based upon a hypothetical that the 
decedent could have died from a brainstem injury.  In contrast, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
32 
 the State maintained, in the instant case Dr. Navin testified 
that Wollaston’s brainstem injury “could have contributed” to 
Wollaston’s death, but indicated he did not have enough 
information to make that determination.  Both cases, the State 
argued, involved a head injury, but Dr. Navin was willing to 
venture an opinion in 
the Lankford trial without any 
corroborated facts and was unwilling to do so in the instant 
case, indicating a defense bias. 
 Similarly, the State argued, Dr. Navin testified that in 
the Higa trial his purpose  was to offer testimony on whether the 
infant could have been killed prior to being thrown off the 
overpass.  The State maintained that in the instant case, Dr. 
Navin testified that Wollaston died of a heart attack and her 
intracranial injuries were “all secondary .”  Thus, the State 
argued, in both Higa  and the instant case, Dr. Navin testified 
to a theory of death that preceded the cause of death advanced 
by the prosecution, thereby favoring the defense and making his 
testimony in Higa
 relevant and  more probative of Dr. Navin’s 
credibility than prejudicial to Udo’s defense .  Additionally, 
the State asserted, Dr. Navin himself characterized Higa  as “the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
33 
 kid off the bridge”  case and it was not improper for the DPA  to 
describe the circumstances of the case for context.15  
 Moreover, the State argued, the DPA ’s closing argument  
statements related to the Lankford and Higa trials were not 
improper and did not resort to  falsehood and misrepresentation.16  
The State asserted that the DPA drew reasonable inferences from 
Dr. Navin’s testimony regarding  his testimony in the Lankford  
trial that Dr. Navin exhibited a defense bias by relying on the 
defendant’s version of the events to state that the decedent’s 
death could have been caused  by a torn brainstem.  The State 
also asserted it was reasonable to infer from Dr. Navin’s 
testimony that his  purpose in the Higa  trial was to “provide a 
defense for the accused murder er that a murder couldn’t have 
happened based on throwing a baby off the overpass because the 
baby could have been dead already.”  Neither comment, the State 
                     
15 The State also countered  Udo’s assertio n that the DPA improperly 
expressed his personal opinion during rebuttal when he said , “Dr. Navin’s 
testimony is for sale” and “ [t]hat’s the unassailable truth.”  That issue is 
not raised in Udo’s application to this court.       
 
16 The State also argued t he same in relation to Udo’s contention that the 
DPA made misleading comments related to Dr. Navin “admitting” being retained 
by another defense attorney for the defense but not testifying because his 
testimony would not have been helpful to the defense in  a case.  The State 
acknowledges that the DPA “overstated the evidence” based on Dr. Navin’s 
testimony, but that the comment did not rise to the level of plain error and 
was made within the context of an “otherwise appropriate argument.”  The ICA 
held that the comment was improper, but harmless.   Udo, SDO at 15 .  That 
issue is not raised in Udo’s application to this court, but we agree with the 
ICA that the comment was improper.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
34 
 argued, was improper, and did not constitute falsehood and 
misrepresentation.17 
 The State contended that even if any of the DPA ’s conduct 
was improper, the conduct did not rise to the level of plain 
error.  The State summarized the evidence presented at trial, 
and asserted  that any error would be harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt be cause the e vidence establishing Wollaston 
died due to blunt force injuries was overwhelmingly stronger 
than the evidence supporting Dr. Navin’s opinion regarding the 
cause of death.  18
3. ICA’s SDO   
 In a n SDO, the ICA affirmed Udo’s conviction and s entence.  
Udo, SDO at 1.  
 The ICA held that the DPA’s cross-examination of Dr. Navin 
regarding his testimonies in the Lankford  and Higa  trials was 
not improper.  Udo , SDO at 5.  Under HRE Rule 609.1, the ICA 
opined that bias, interest, or motive is always relevant and  an 
expert witness’s testimony in other cases may be used to 
                     
17 The State also contended the DPA’s alleged “disparaging remarks” about 
Dr. Navin in his closing argument were not improper, were reasonably drawn 
inferences from the evidence presented, and, “when viewed in context,” “were 
hyperbole, colloquialisms, or figures of speech reflecting the DPA’s 
interpretation of the evidence to empha size Dr. Navin’s bias  . . . .”  
 
18  Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(d)  (2016), Udo 
did not file a reply brief.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
35 
 demonstrate the expert’s defense bias.  Udo, SDO at 4 (citations 
omitted).  
 According to the ICA , Dr. Navin’s testimony  was admissible 
and he had the opportunity to explain or deny the State’s 
allegations with respect to his prior testimony.  Udo, SDO at 5.  
Although the ICA agreed that the DPA’s characterization of 
Lankford and Higa was unnecessarily provocative, it opined the 
inquiry was generally pertinent to Udo’s case and “did not rise 
to the level of misconduct in Rogan . . . .”  Udo, SDO at 5.   
The ICA thus held that the DPA ’s cross-examination of Dr. Navin 
about his testimony in the Lankford and Higa cases did not 
constitute prosecutorial misconduct.  Udo, SDO at 5.   
 As to the Lankford  Closing Remark, the ICA stated  the 
reference to the lack of indep endent corroboration was 
potentially inflammatory, but held it was not improper because 
the defense had the opportunity but failed to object or remind 
the jury that the Lankford  testimony was based upon a 
hypothetical.  Udo , SDO at 8 . 
 Regarding the Higa  Closing Remark, the ICA opined the 
remarks tended to unnecessarily highlight the odious nature of 
the facts in the Higa  case, but were not inconsistent with Dr. 
Navin’s testimony and were pertinent to Dr. Na vin’s credibility.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
36 Udo, SDO at 8.  Thus, the ICA held, the remark did not 
constitute prosecutorial misconduct.  Udo , SDO at 8. 
III. Standard of Review
As we stated in State v. Wakisaka, 
If defense counsel does not object at trial to 
prosecutorial misconduct, this court may nevertheless 
recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous.  “We may 
recognize plain error when the error committed affects 
substantial rights of the defendant.”  State v. Cordeiro , 
99 Hawai ʻi 390, 405, 56 P.3d 692, 707 (2002) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted).   See also  Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) (2003) (“Plain errors 
or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed 
although  they were not brought to the attention of the 
court.”).   We will not overturn a defendant ’s conviction on 
the basis of plainly erroneous prosecutorial misconduct, 
however, unless “there is a reasonable possibility that the 
misconduct complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.”  State v. Rogan , 91 Hawaiʻ i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 
1231, 1238 (1999).  As we stated in  State v. Sawyer : 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct 
are reviewed under the harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt standard, which requires 
an examination of the record and a 
determination of “whether there is a 
reasonable possibility that the error 
complained of might have contributed to 
the conviction.”   Factors considered are: 
(1)the nature of the conduct; (2) the
promptness of a curative instruction; and
(3)the strength or weakness of the
evidence against the defendant.
88 Hawai ʻi 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawaiʻ i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 
1215, 1220 (1996)) (citations omitted).  
102 Hawai ʻi 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003).  
IV. Discussion
A. Overview of P rosecutorial M isconduct Analysis
On certiorari, Udo contends the ICA erred in rejecting her
claim that the DPA  engaged in four instances of prosecutorial ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
37 
 misconduct, which dep rived her of her right to a fair trial:  
the Lankford Question, the Lankford Closing Remark, the Higa  
Questions, and the Higa  Closing Remark (collectively the 
“Lankford and Higa References”) .  Udo did not object to the 
Lankford and Higa References at trial, but requests that this 
court recognize plain error and vacate her conviction and remand 
her case for a new trial.
 
The term “prosecutorial  misconduct ” is a legal term of art 
that refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, 
however harmless or unintentional.  State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai ʻi 
20, 25, 108 P.3d 974, 979 (2005).  “If defense counsel does not 
object at trial to prosecutorial misconduct, this court may 
nevertheless recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous, ” 
meaning that the error a ffected a defendant’s substantial 
rights.  Wakisaka, 102 Hawaiʻ i at 513, 78 P.3d at 326.  See also 
HRPP Rule 52(b) (2003) (“Plain errors or defects affecting 
substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought 
to the attention of the court.”).  A defendant’s substantial 
rights include the right to a fair trial.  State v. Fields, 115 
Hawaiʻi 503, 538, 168 P.3d 955, 990 (2007).  Thus, prosecutorial 
misconduct provides grounds for a new tria l if a prosecutor’s 
actions denied the defendant a fair trial.  
State v. Pasene , 144 
Hawaiʻi 339, 364, 439 P.3d 864, 889 (2019).   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
38 Whenever a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct , this 
court must first decide: (1) whether the conduct was improper; 
(2)if the conduct was improper, whether the misconduct was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct 
was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to 
bar reprosecution.  Maluia, 107 Hawai ʻi at 25-26, 108 P.3d at 
979-80.   To address the second factor, whether allegd 
misconduct is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, this court 
considers three prongs, “the nature of the alleged misconduct, 
the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the 
strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant.”   
State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai ‘i 196, 208, 65 P.3d 143, 155 (2003) 
(citations omitted).  Prosecutorial misconduct is not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt if “there is a reasonable possibility 
that the misconduct complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.”  Wakisaka, 102 Hawaii at 513, 78 P.3d at 326.  ̒
If the conduct was improper and not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt, then the prosecutor’s actions de nied the 
defendant a fair trial, providing grounds for a new trial.  We 
must then also address the third factor of the prosecutorial 
misconduct analysis: whether the misconduct was so egregious as 
to bar reprosecution.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
39 B. Whether t he Conduct Was Improper
The first factor of the prosecutorial misconduct analysis
is determining whether the DPA’s conduct was improper.  In 
evaluating whether a prosecutor’s conduct was  proper, “this 
court considers the nature of the challenged conduct in relation 
to our criminal justice system generally and the special role of 
the prosecutor specifically.”  State v. Underwood, 142 Hawai ‘i 
317, 325, 418 P.3d 658, 666 (2018) (citing Rogan, 91 Hawai‘i at 
412-15, 984 P.2d at 1238-41).
Udo asserts the Lankford Question ( the DPA’s cross-
examination as to whether Dr. Navin “took the word of the 
accused murderer without any independent corroboration to 
support his version of events” when Dr. Navin testified based on 
a hypothetical that someone in the decedent’s circumstances 
could have died of a brainstem injury) constituted prosecutorial 
misconduct because the questioning was inflammatory, irrelevant, 
and prejudicial.  The State argues the Lankford Question was a 
permissible attack on Dr. Navin’s credibility to establish bias 
by demonstrating that Dr. Navin would “tailor” his opinion to 
assist the defense, even without evidence.  
As to the Higa  Questions (the DPA’s questioning implying  
that Dr. Navin’s purpose in testifying in the Higa  trial was to 
say that the defendant “couldn’t be guilty of murder” ), Udo ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
40 
 argues Dr. Navin did not expressly or implicitly indicate his 
purpose was to provide a defense for Matthew Higa.  Udo argues 
the Higa Questions were irrelevant and prejudicial and were only 
meant to inflame the jury and create hostility towards Dr. 
Navin.  The State, in response , asserts that the Higa  Questions 
were relevant and probat ive of Dr. Navin’s defense bias  and as 
evidence that Dr. Navin is a “hired gun” for the defense 
because, similar to Udo’s case, his testimony in Higa also 
provided a causation defense for the defendant.   
 HRE Rule 702. 1(a) (1984) provides that  an expert witness 
“may be cross-examined to the s ame extent as any other witness” 
and, additionally , “may be cross -examined as to (1) the witness’ 
qualifications, (2) the subject to which the witness ’ expert 
testimony relates, and (3) the matter upon which the witness’ 
opinion is based and the reasons for the witness’ opinion. ”  
Pursuant to HRE Rule 609.1,  “[t]he credibility of a witness may 
be attacked by evidence of bias ,” and extrinsic evidence of bias 
is admissible on cross -examination if  “the matter is brought to 
the attention of the witness and the witness is afforded an 
opportunity to explain or deny the matter.”  We have noted, 
“[b]ias, interest , or motive is always relevant under HRE Rule 
609.1.  So long as a proper foundation is laid, bias can be 
raised at any time by the witness’s testimony  or other ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
41 
 evidence.”  Estrada , 69 Haw. at 220, 738 P.2d at 823 (citing 
State v. Murphy , 59 Haw. 1, 575 P.2d 448 (1978)) .   
A prosecutor’s latitude in cross -examination, however,  
remains limited by HRE Rule 403’s requirement that the probative 
value of evidence substantially outweigh the danger of unfair 
prejudicial effect of the evidence.   More importantly, the 
prosecutor has a duty to seek justice, not merely convict, and 
to not use arguments calculated to inflame the passions of a 
jury.  Rogan, 91 Hawai ʻi at 412-13, 984 P.2d at 1238 -39 
(prosecutor has “duty to seek justice, to exercise the highest 
good faith in the interest of the public” and “not use arguments 
calculated to inflame the passions . . . of the jury.”) 
(citations omitted).  19
 The Lankford Question and Higa  Questions had limited 
probative value as evidence of  Dr. Navin’s alleged defense bias.  
The Lankford Question evidenced that Dr. Navin based his opinion 
in the Lankford trial on “facts or data . . . perceived by or 
made known to [him] at or b efore the hearing,” which is a 
permissible manner of forming the bases of an expert opinion 
                     
19 HRE Rule 403 states as follows: “ Although relevant, evidence may be  
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of  
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by  
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of  
cumulative evidence.”  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
42 
 under HRE Rule 703 (1984 ).20  With respect to the Higa Questions, 
Dr. Navin’s testimony in the Higa trial only went to the manner 
and time of death advanced by the prosecution; it was not 
testimony of whether the defendant in that case had actually 
killed the infant .  Even if Dr. Navin’s opinion formed the ba sis 
of a causation defense,  the fact that he did so provides little 
support for the State’s assertion that Dr.  Navin is a “hired 
gun.”  In fact, Dr. Navin testified that he had testified for 
the State and for the defense over a hundred times each.21  
 The  DPA’s questions were , however, highly and unfairly 
prejudicial.  The Lankford  Question insinuated that it was 
improper for Dr. Navin to have rendered an opinion based on 
hypothetical facts provided to him when such questioning is 
explicitly allowed by HRE Rule 703.  The Lankford Question also 
implied that it was improper for an expert to believe the story 
of “an accused murderer.”  To suggest that because someone is 
                     
20 HRE Rule 703, “Bases of opinion testimony by experts,” states as 
follows:  
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an 
expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived 
by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing.  
If of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the 
particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the 
subject, the facts or data need not be admissible in 
evidence.  The court may, however, disallow testimony in 
the form of an opinion or infere nce if the underlying facts 
or data indicate lack of trustworthiness.  
 
21  See also note 14, supra. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
43 
 accused of a crime, an expert witness should not consider that 
person’s version of events undermines the presumption of 
innocence and is an insinuation which may constitute misconduct.  
Cf. State v. Austin, 143 Hawai‘ i 18, 
40-41, 422 P.3d 18, 40 -41 
(2018) (“[T]he prosecutor’s remark regarding whether [the 
defendant’s] testimony was corroborated by other evidence may 
also have qualified as misconduct to the extent that it might 
infer that [the defendant] had a burden to produce evidence 
tending to corroborate his testimony.”) . 
 Most importantly, however, the Lankford  and Higa  cases are 
perhaps two of the most highly publicized, notorious death cases 
in this jurisdiction’s recent history .  To lay a foundati
on, the 
prosecutor engaged Dr. Navin in a series of questions vividly 
recalling the troubling and gruesome facts of those cases, 
thereby linking Dr. Navin with  notorious murder defendants.   All 
of the questions directed to Dr. Navin regarding the Lankford  
and Higa cases  may well have served to inflame the jury against 
an expert who had testified for the defense in those cases.  
  Udo also challenges the Lankford Closing Remark and the 
Higa Closing Remark as misconduct, again arguing that the 
remarks were only intended to inflame the passions of the jury 
and to create hostility towards Dr. Navin.  The State contends 
the ICA correctly held that the DPA was within the wide latitude ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
44 
 afforded to prosecutors in closing argument to draw inferences 
from the testimony. 
 Granted, it is well -established that prosecutors are 
afforded wide latitude in closing to discuss the evidence, and 
may “state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as to 
draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence .”  State v. 
Clark, 83 Hawai ‘i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) (citations 
omitted).  In all stages of trial, however, a prosecutor remains 
bound by the duty to “seek justice, not merely to convict.”  
Rogan, 91 Hawaiʻi at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (citations omitted).    
 The Minnesota Supreme Court addressed a situation  similar 
to this case in State v. Blasus, 445 N.W.2d 535 (Minn. 1989 ).  
It held a district court erred when it allowed cross -examination 
of two defense expert witnesses on their  past testimony in cases 
where “[t]he murders referred to were gruesome and reprehensible  
. . . .”  445 N.W.2d at 540.  Although the State of Minnesota 
argued the cross -examination was necessary to demonstrate the 
expert witnesses’ defense bias, the Blasus court found the 
prosecution had already elicited testimony from the experts to 
establish a defense bias, such as the number of times they had 
testified for the defense.  445 N.W.2d at 539.  The Blasus court 
explained that it recognized the value of revealin g witness 
bias, but prosecutor s are more limited than their  civil ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
45 
 counterparts in cross- examination because of their mandate to 
seek justice, “not merely  to convict”:  
In assessing the propriety of the prosecutor’s cross-
examination, we are keenly aware of the need to preserve 
counsel’s ability to question adverse witnesses.  The 
truth-seeking function of the courts is best served when 
counsel is allowed to seek and reveal hidden prejudice, 
bias, or other factors whi ch may color a witness’s 
testimony and affect its reliability.  In the civil 
context, where the need for certainty is less, an appellate 
court may be less inclined to intrude on the trial court’s 
discretion in weighing prejudicial effect of evidence 
against its probative value.  
 
By its very nature, however, the criminal context is 
different.   Attorneys who prosecute criminal cases are 
charged with responsibilities to the court, to the 
constitution, and to the defendant not present in civil 
cases.  “The duty of the prosecutor is to seek justice, not 
merely to convict.”   ABA Standards Relating to the 
Prosecution Function, Standard 1.1(c);  See also , National 
District Attorneys Association,  National Prosecution 
Standards , Standard 176 and commentary p. 248 -249 (1977)[ .]  
These additional responsibilities limit the scope of proper 
conduct of prosecutors to a narrower field than is 
available to their civil law counterparts.  
 
445 N.W.2d at 539 -40.  
 Accordingly, the Blasus court found “ the prosecution 
intended the jury to mentally link appellant with the 
frightening violence of these other cases”  through the cross -
examination regarding the experts’ testimony as to “gruesome and 
reprehensible” murders.  445 N.W.2d at 540.  Thus, the Blasus 
court held “the prosecu tor's questioning of defense expert 
witnesses as to their prior participation in specific, 
notorious[,] and highly publicized murder cases was improper   
. . . .”  445 N.W.2d at 541.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
46 As this court recently  reiterated in Pasene , “prosecutors 
‘should not use arguments calculated to inflame the passions or 
prejudices of the jury[,]’ as ‘[a]rguments that rely on . . . 
prejudices of the jurors introduce into the trial elements of 
irrelevance and irrationality that cannot be tolerated. ’”  
Pasene, 144 Hawaiʻ i at 370, 439 P.3d at 895 (quoting 
Rogan, 91 
Hawai‘i at 413, 9 84 P.2d at 1239).  In Pasene, a prosecutor 
likened the presumption of innocence applied to the defendant in 
that case as the same presumption applied to John Gotti and 
Charles Manson.  144 Hawaiʻ i at 357, 439 P.3d at  882.  An 
objection was made by defense counsel and immediately sustained; 
the court instructed the jury to disregard the statements.  Id. 
We held that although it could not be said that the DPA’s 
statement “was calculated to inflame the passions or prejudices 
of the jury, that was likely the result.”  144 Hawaiʻi at 370, 
439 P.3d at 895 (emphasis in original). 
 We explained that 
“referencing such notorious examples of heinous murderers during 
the State’s rebuttal closing in a murder trial may lead the jury 
to react based on emotion, rather than in an objective way, and 
threatens to introduce ‘an atmosphere of bias and prejudice’ as  
the jury enters deliberation.”  Id. (quoting State v. Kahalewai, 
55 Haw. 127, 129, 516 P.2d 336, 338 (1973)). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
47 What is important in this case is that whether or not the 
references  “were calculated to inflame the passions or 
prejudices of the jury, that was the likely result.”  144 Hawaiʻi 
at 370, 439 P.3d at 895 (emphasis in original).  “As an officer 
of the court, the prosecutor is expected to know and abide by 
the standards of professional conduct, to operate in accordance 
with the interests of justice, and to act with due regard for 
fairness and the rights of the defendant. ”  Pasene, 144 Hawai
ʻi 
at 371, 439 P.3d at 896 (citing 
STANDARDS FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE, 
Standards No. 3-1.2, 3-1.9 (ABA 2015)).  The Lankford and Higa 
References may well have served to inflame the passions of the 
jury against an expert who had testified for the defense in 
those cases.  We therefore conclude that the Lankford and Higa 
References were improper.  
We pause in our analysis to note that the ICA stated the 
Lankford and Higa References were not improper because they did 
not rise “to the level of misconduct in Rogan . . . . ”  Udo, SDO 
at 5.  In Rogan , we held a prosecutor’s rebuttal argument 
statement -- “This is every mother’s nightmare.  Leave your 
daughter for an hour and a half, and you walk back in, and 
here’s some black, military guy on top of your daughter ” -- 
constituted misconduct because it
 was an impermissible appeal to 
racial prejudice.  Rogan , 91 Hawai ʻi at 412, 984 P.
2d at 1238.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
48 
 We held that the misconduct was so egregious that it was 
necessary to reverse the defendant ’s judgment of conviction and 
sentence and that retrial was barred by the double jeopardy 
clause of article I, section 10 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution.  91 
Hawaiʻi at 408, 984 P.2d at 1234.   
 Rogan  is not a floor for establishing whether challenged 
prosecutorial conduct is improper, but is rather illustrative of 
an extreme instance of misconduct.  As we explained in Maluia , 
“the term ‘prosecutorial misconduct’ is a legal term of art that 
refers to any  improper action committed by a prosecutor, however 
harmless or unintentional.”  107 Hawai ʻi at 25, 108 P.3d at 979 
(emphasis in original).  For example, w e have also found that a 
prosecutor’s remarks or questions were improper when they 
pointed to the consequence s of a jury’s verdict, State v. Tuua , 
125 Hawaiʻ i 10, 14, 250 P.3d 273, 277 (2011); did not draw 
legitimate inferences from the testimony at trial, State v. 
Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986); or 
expressed a personal opinion as to what an “innocent” person who 
have said or done, State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawaiʻi 235, 254 –55, 
178 P.3d 1, 20– 21 (2008).   
Rather, “the level of misconduct in Rogan” was relevant to 
the third factor of the prosecutorial misconduct analysis, i.e., 
(1) if prosecutorial misconduct occurred (2)  that was not ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
49 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, (3) “whether the misconduct 
was so egregious as to bar reprosecution. ”  Maluia, 107 Hawaiʻi 
at 25-26, 108 P.3d at 979-80.  In Rogan, it was.  Thus, the ICA 
erred in considering Rogan  as a threshold in addressing whether 
misconduct occurred, which is the first factor of the 
prosecutorial misconduct analysis.  
C. Whether the Misconduct Was Harmless Beyond a Reasonable
Doubt
In addressing the second factor of the prosecutorial
misconduct analysis, whether alleged misconduct was plain error 
affecting Udo’s substantial rights and therefore not harmless  
beyond a reasonable doubt, this court considers three prongs: 
“the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of 
a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness of the 
evidence against the defendant.”  Iuli, 101 Hawai ‘i at 208, 65 
P.3d at 155 (citations omitted).
1. Nature of the misconduct
As we noted earlier, “ ‘prosecutorial  misconduct ’ is a legal 
term of art that refers to any improper action committed by a 
prosecutor, however harmless or unintentional.”  Maluia, 107 
Hawaiʻi at 25, 108 P.3d at 979.  We further stated in Maluia : 
[T]here are varying degrees of prosecutorial
misconduct  . . . . [M]ost cases . . . do not involve 
prosecutors who intend to eviscerate the defendant’s 
constitutional and statutory rights . . . .  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
50 Nevertheless, we decline to create a separate category of 
prosecutorial “mistake” or “error.”  There are three 
reasons why we believe that our current method of analysis  
-- in which all improper conduct is labeled 
“prosecutorial  misconduct ” -- is more appropriate.  
First, there is no need to create separate categories 
because this court already distinguishes 
innocuous  prosecutorial misconduct  from more serious 
deceitful behavior  . . . . In sum, whenever a defendant 
alleges prosecutorial misconduct , this court must decide: 
(1)whether the conduct was improper; (2) if the conduct
was improper, whether the misconduct was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct was not
harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to bar
reprosecution.  In the course of making these three
determinations, the seriousness of the misconduct becomes
evident, and we need not attach a separate label for our
disposition to be clear.  Consequently, a separate label
for “misconduct” cases and “error” cases is unnecessary.
Second, a find ing of “prosecutorial  misconduct ” is not 
equivalent to a finding of “professional misconduct” 
pursuant to the Hawaii ̒ Rules of Professional Conduct 
(HRPC), and a prosecutor need not face disciplinary 
sanctions merely because we have used the term 
“prosecutorial misconduct .” . . . . 
Third, we believe that separate nomenclature for different 
types of  prosecutorial misconduct  would lead to protracted 
litigation over semantics; this would place an additional 
burden on our courts with no corresponding benefit.   
Maluia, 107 Hawai ʻi at 25-26, 108 P.3d at 979- 80. 
As in Blasus, the DPA ’s conduct in this case “m entally 
link[ed] [the defendant] with the frightening violence of these 
other cases”  through the cross-examination regarding the 
experts’ testimony as to “gruesome and reprehensible” murders,  
and was improper for the reasons explained.  445 N.W.2d at 540.  
Also, Dr. Navin was Udo’s only witness and was critical to her 
defense.  Therefore, as in Pasene, this prong weighs in favor of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
51 vacating Udo’s conviction.  Pasene, 144 Hawai ʻi at 371, 439 P.3d 
at 896.  
2. Promptness or L ack of a C urative Instruction
As to the second prong of the harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt analysis, there was no objection and the court did not 
provide any curative instruction
 after the improper Lankford and 
Higa References.  In Pasene, there was an objection and curative 
instruction given for the prosecutor’s brief likening of the 
defendant to John Gotti and Charles Manson; we noted that the 
curative instruction, however, “may not have sufficiently 
negated the prejudicial impact of the DPA’s  statement.”  144 
Hawaiʻi at 370-71, 439 P.3d at  895-96.  Unlike in Pasene , at 
Udo’s trial (1) there were multiple references to Lankford  and 
Higa, both local cases in which Dr. Navin had testified; and (2) 
Udo’s defense rested entirely on the trustworthiness of Dr. 
Navin’s testimony.  Thus, even if a curative instruction had 
been given, “it may not  have sufficiently negated the 
prejudicial impact of the DPA’s  statement [s].”  See id.  The 
second prong therefore also weighs heavily in favor of a finding 
of that the misconduct was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  See Wakisaka, 102 Hawai ʻi at 516, 78 P.3d at 329 (lack of 
curative instruction weighed in defendant’s favor) . ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
52 
      3.  Strength or Weakness of Evidence  
 In considering the final prong of the harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt analysis, we review the evidence presented to 
the jury to determine whether the evidence was so overwhelming ly 
strong that there is not “a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed to” Udo’s conviction.  
Underwood, 142 Hawai ‘i at 329, 418 P.3d at 670 (citation 
omitted).   
 The jury found Udo guilty of the included offense of 
reckless manslaughter in violation of HRS § 707-702(1)(a).  
Thus, the jury determined that Udo caused Wollaston’s death, but 
did so with a less culpable state of mind than that necessary 
for second degree murder.  Compare HRS § 707 -702(a)(1) with  HRS 
§ 707-701.5.   
Dr. Navin, Udo’s only witness, opined that Wollaston’s 
death could have been caused by a heart attack and not by the 
injuries inflicted by Udo, as explained in more detail in 
Section II.B.1.b above.   
On the other hand, the State elicited the following 
evidence to support Udo’s manslaug hter conviction.   
 First, there was no real dispute as to Udo’s identity as 
the woman who attacked Wollaston and t hat Wollaston died  the 
morning of July 21, 2014.  Regarding the cause of death, ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
53 
 Paramedic Kihe testified (1) Wollaston appeared to have died 
from a “closed head injury ;” and (2) Wollaston did not exhibit 
signs of a heart attack.  Kingston also described that Wollaston 
had “no motion” after the “final blow,”  and his testimony of 
Wollaston’s behavior did not inclu de any o f the tell- tale signs 
Kihe and Dr. Navin explained for someone experiencing a heart 
attack (chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and 
dizziness).  
 
Also, Dr. Happy, the medi cal examiner and board- certified 
in anatomical and forensic pathology, not only testified  
Wollaston had several head injuries consistent with a punch, 
kick, or stomp, including a laceration in her brainstem and 
hemorrhaging in multiple places in her brain , he also opined 
that Wollaston’s death was caused by “blunt force head and neck 
injury,”  and the “mechanism of death” was  subarachnoid 
hemorrhaging around the brainstem. 
 
The State also presented evidence to discredit Dr. Navin’s 
theory that Wollaston was experiencing a heart attack prior to 
entering into the altercation with Udo and his theory that the 
increased stress of the fight caused her death.  Dr. Navin ’s 
opinion was based on Wollaston’s all eged long history  of 
alcoholism, drug abuse, including marijuana and 
methamphetamines, and substandard living experience as a ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
54 
 constellation of factors leading to the heart attack.  The 
State, however, also elicited evidence during cross- examination 
of Dr. Navin that (1) contraction band necrosis is not a 
specific finding and could be attributed to epinephrine or other 
causes; (2)
 a neck injury li ke Wollaston’s could be fatal ; (3) 
Dr. Navin did not examine the slide of Wollaston’s brainstem 
prior to submitting his expert 
report; and (4 ) Wollaston’s blood 
contained an inactive component of THC not likely to increase 
risk of a heart attack.  
 Through Dr. Happy’s rebuttal examination , the State also 
presented evidence that (1) Wollaston had four 
different sources 
of epinephrine on the morning of July 21, 2014; (2) Wollaston 
did not have atherosclerosis, a condition possibly necessary to 
support Dr. Navin’s  timeline that Wollaston began experiencing a 
heart attack four hours prior to the altercation with Udo; (3) 
Wollaston’s increased heart weight was due to hypertension, 
a 
condition which does not contribute to heart attack risk; (4) 
Wollaston’s heart and liver did not evince chronic alcoholism; 
and (5)
 there was nothing in Wollaston’s medical record 
indicating methamphetamine use. 
 The circuit court had also 
instructed the jury to disregard any statements Dr. Navin made 
related to Wollaston only “b
locking punches” after she fell , ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
55 
 which Dr. Navin repeatedly testified was a basis for his opinion 
that Wollaston was experiencing a heart attack. 
 Taken together, the
 State presented strong evidence that 
Wollaston died from blunt force head injuries recklessly caused 
by Udo.  The evidence, however, is not so overwhelmingly strong 
to meet the high threshold of harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  The only eyewitness to the incident to testify for the 
State, Kingston, was a f riend of the decedent and had been 
consuming significant amounts of vodka leading up to the early 
morning incident.  Kingston testified that Wollaston voluntarily 
entered into a fight with Udo, then Udo and Wollaston fell over 
Clinton.  Although he testified that Udo kicked Wollaston in the 
head while she was down several times, Kingston
 also testified 
that “to the final blow [Wollaston] was motionless.”  He did not 
testify that Wollaston was conscious after falling to the ground 
with Udo.   
Dr. Navin , Udo’s only witness, then opined regarding 
another possible cause of Wollaston’s death.  He testified that 
upon reviewing Wollaston’s autopsy report , he noticed 
indications of previous heart damage, including the presence of 
boxcar nuclei, which could increase the risk of heart attack.  
He also testified that Wollaston’s blood alcohol level was 
0.278, and there was evidence of marijuana in high levels, which ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
56 
 could increase the risk of heart attack.  He also testified that 
Wollaston’s heart was abnormally large, and that the contraction 
band necrosis revealed after he had requested reslicing of the 
paraffin slides was more likely from a heart attack.  
Therefore, i t cannot be said beyond a reasonable doubt that 
the DPA’s inflammatory questions and closing argument did not 
draw unfair scorn and prejudice to Udo’s sole witness upon whose 
testimony her defense rested.  See Tuua, 125 Hawai ʻi at 17, 250 
P.3d at 280 (holding that where the credibility of witnesses in 
trial was pivotal, improper comments impugning credibility 
weighed against harmlessness).  
Thus, there is a reasonable 
possibility that the misconduct might have contributed to Udo’s 
conviction.  See Underwood , 142 Hawaiʻi at 328, 418 P.3d at 669.   
  As a result, the prosecutorial misconduct in this case was 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and affected Udo’s right 
to a fair trial.  We therefore notice plain error for the 
violation of Udo’s substantial right to a fair trial.    
D. Whether the M isconduct Was so Egregious as to Bar 
Reprosecution  
 
Having determined that the first two factors of the 
prosecutorial misconduct analysis have established prosecutorial 
misconduct requiring vacation of Udo’s conviction , we must now 
address the third factor, whether the misconduct was so ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND THE PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
57 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna   
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
 egregious as to bar reprosecution.  Maluia, 107 Hawai ʻi at 25-26, 
108 P.3d at 979- 80.   
 Although we hold that the DPA’s misconduct dep rived Udo of 
her right to a fair trial, we do not find that the conduct was 
so egregious as to bar retrial under the double jeopardy 
protections of article I, section 10 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution.  
See Underwood, 142 Hawai‘i at 329, 418 P.3d at 670 (“Our 
decisions do not provide bright line rules for determining when 
misconduct is sufficiently egregious to bar retrial, but we have 
emphasized that it is a ‘much higher standard than that used to 
determine whether a defendant is entitled to a new trial. ’”).  
V. Conclusion 
 For the reasons discussed, we therefore vacate the ICA’s  
August 3, 2018 Judgment on Appeal and the circuit court’s 
September 13, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, and 
remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedin gs 
consistent with this opinion.   
William H. Jameson, Jr.
for petitioner   
      
Brandon H. Ito   
and Sonja P. McCullen
for respondent    
  
 
      
 
 
      
 