*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
IN THE INTEREST OF ASK 
 
SCWC-21-0000285 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-21-0000285; FC-S NO. 18-00112, FC-S NO. 18-00241, 
FC-A NO. 20-1-6137, FC-A NO. 21-1-6005) 
 
DECEMBER 27, 2022 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY EDDINS, J. 
 
I. 
The family court has to consider sixteen factors to guide 
its best interests of the child finding in parental custody and 
visitation cases.  See 
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(b) 
(2018).  But there are no statutory factors to guide a family 
court’s “best interests of the individual” finding in adoption Hawai‘iElectronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-21-0000285
27-DEC-2022
09:06 AM
Dkt. 14 OPA  2 and permanent placement cases.  See HRS § 578-8 (2018 & Supp. 
2019). 
So what’s a family court to do when faced with competing 
petitions for adoption of three young siblings? 
In petitions for adoption and permanent placement, we hold 
that a family court is free to consider any admissible evidence 
that addresses its dispositive fact of consequence, the best 
interests of the individual.  This may include evidence supporting some best interests factors listed in HRS § 571-
46(b).  And it may include much more.  Only the rules of 
evidence confine the family court as it finds, weighs, and 
values facts to reach its best interests determination.   
Because the Family Court of the First Circuit properly 
assessed the relevant evidence to support its best interests of 
the individual determination, we affirm its orders. 
II. 
In 2018, the Department of Human Services (DHS) received 
reports of parental neglect involving two siblings, three-year 
old and seven-month old sisters.  DHS assumed temporary foster 
custody of the Children under the Child Protective Act (CPA).  
It placed the Children with a DHS-vetted family, the Resource 
Caregivers (RCGs).  Months later a brother was born; DHS took 
custody and placed the newborn with his sisters in RCGs’ home.   3 The Children’s mother died in 2019 while CPA proceedings 
were ongoing.  DHS then moved to terminate Father’s parental 
rights.  Father stipulated to the termination of his parental 
rights in July 2020. 
Once parental rights terminate, DHS assumes legal custody 
and must find the child a suitable permanent home.  In re Doe, 
100 Hawai‘i 335, 346 n.19, 60 P.3d 285, 296 n.19 (2002).  DHS 
also has to consent to the proposed adoption of a child in its 
custody under HRS § 578-2(6) (2018), though its placement 
decision is subject to the family court’s independent best 
interests determination.  See In re AS, 132 Hawai‘ i 368, 378, 322 
P.3d 263, 273 (2014).  
In 2020, the Children’s paternal Aunt and Uncle (Relatives) 
from California successfully moved to intervene in the CPA’s 
permanent placement and adoption proceedings. 
DHS filed a petition on RCGs’ behalf to adopt the Children.  
DHS recommended permanent placement with RCGs in October 2020.   
In January 2021, Relatives filed their own petition to adopt the 
Children.  DHS opposed the petition and filed a Notice of the 
Department of Human Services’ Withholding of Consent to 
[Relatives’] Adoption Petition. 
 The family court consolidated the dual adoption cases.  It 
held a four-day trial on the Children’s adoption and permanent   4 placement.1  When trial started, the sisters had lived with RCGs 
for about two years and seven months, and their younger brother 
had lived with RCGs for two years and two months. 
The family court found that adoption by the RCGs was in 
each child’s best interests and confirmed DHS’s placement 
decision.  The court checklisted HRS § 571-46(b).  It marched 
through all sixteen factors, recognized most did not apply, and 
considered other factors including finances and kinship.  It decided on balance that the pertinent evidence favored RCGs.
 
The court granted DHS’s petition for adoption by Resource 
Caregivers.  And it denied the petition for adoption by the 
Children’s paternal Aunt and Uncle. 
Relatives appealed.  They challenge the court’s use of HRS 
§ 571-46(b)’s factors, and claim the family court failed to 
adequately consider best interests factors in their favor, like 
“blood” and money.  They also say the court applied an incorrect 
legal standard and failed to independently review DHS’s placement recommendation. 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals affirmed the family 
court’s orders.  Now Relatives repeat their arguments and urge 
“this court [to] clarify what factors are to be applied by the 
 
1  The Honorable John C. Bryant, Jr. presided. 
   5 trial courts to determine best interests in permanent placement 
proceedings and adoption proceedings.” 
III. 
Contrary to Relatives’ assertions, a family court does not 
necessarily err when it relies on HRS § 571-46(b)’s mandatory custody and visitation factors to guide a best interests 
determination in adoption and permanent placement proceedings.  
But Relatives make a cogent point that the factors are mostly ill-suited to an adoption and permanent placement case. 
Because most of the custody and visitation factors focus on 
parents – their history, characteristics, and quality of 
relationship with their child – once parental rights terminate, 
those factors recede.  HRS § 571-46 is titled “Criteria and 
procedure in awarding custody and visitation.”  (Emphasis 
added.)  HRS § 571-46(b) lists the factors
2 that family courts 
 
2  Under HRS § 571- 46(b): 
In determining what constitutes the best interest of the 
child under this section, the court shall consider, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a 
child by a parent;  
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a 
child by a parent;  
(3) The overall quality of the parent- child 
relationship; 
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by each 
parent prior and subsequent to a marital or other 
type of separation; 
   6 “shall consider” to determine whether a parent is awarded 
custody or visitation of a child.  Only five of the sixteen 
factors directly link to “the needs of the child.”  See HRS 
§§ 571-46(b)(6) - (10).  So in post-parental termination cases, 
there is no reason to require family courts to do what the court 
did here - evaluate each custody and visitation factor.  See In 
 
(5) Each parent’s cooperation in developing and 
implementing a plan to meet the child’s ongoing needs, interests, and schedule; provided that this factor shall not be considered in any case where the court has determined that family violence has been 
committed by a parent; 
(6) The physical health needs of the child; (7) The emotional needs of the child; 
(8) The safety needs of the child; 
(9) The educational needs of the child; 
(10) The child’s need for relationships with 
siblings; 
(11) Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they 
allow the child to maintain family connections 
through family events and activities; . . . 
(12) Each parent’s actions demonstrating that they separate the child’s needs from the parent’s needs; 
 (13) Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol 
abuse by a parent; 
(14) The mental health of each parent; 
(15) The areas and levels of conflict present within 
the family; and  
(16) A parent’s prior wilful [sic] misuse of the 
protection from abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical advantage in any proceeding involving the custody determination of a minor. . . .  
 
(Emphases added. )  
   7 the Interest of Hannah L., 390 P.3d 1153, 1159 (Alaska 2017) 
(rejecting petitioner’s argument that family courts must base 
adoption best interests determinations on the factors required 
in child custody cases). 
Further distancing the parental custody factors from 
adoption and permanent placement, HRS § 578-8 concerns the 
adoption of an individual.  It requires that an “adoption will 
be for the best interests of the individual.”3  Individuals come 
in all ages.  And have varied needs.  So HRS § 571-46(b)’s best 
interests of a child factors do not neatly migrate to HRS § 578-
8’s best interests of an individual determination. 
Relatives believe the family court’s reliance on HRS § 571-
46(b) meant the court placed “unreasonable weight” on the 
Children’s attachment to RCGs, while undervaluing other factors.  
They argue that the mandatory parental custody factors should 
 
3  HRS § 578 -8(a) reads:  
After considering the petition and any evidence as the 
petitioners and any other properly interested person may 
wish to present, the court may enter a decree of adoption 
if it is satisfied that:  
     (1)  The individual is adoptable under sections 578- 1 
and 578- 2; 
 
     (2)  The individual is physically, mentally, and 
otherwise suitable for adoption by the petitioners; 
      (3)  The petitioners are fit and proper persons and 
financially able to give the individual a proper home and education, if the individual is a child; and 
 
     (4)  The adoption will be for the best interests of 
the individual. 
   8 not be given presumptive weight in adoption and permanent 
placement proceedings. 
True, there is no statutory provision that gives some 
evidence superior probative value over other evidence in 
adoption and permanent placement cases.  But here the family 
court did not automatically boost the value of attachment 
evidence, or any evidence.  The court merely attached probative 
value to that evidence.  It did not treat attachment as a statutory super-factor or give that evidence preferential 
treatment.  Rather, it weighed the attachment evidence alongside 
the other evidence and found it valuable. 
Under the circumstances of the case, the family court 
viewed the attachment evidence as compelling.  The court 
believed that removing the Children from RCGs’ home would not 
serve their best interests.  It explained that the Children 
identify RCGs as their parents, and the RCGs’ home as their 
home.  The court stressed the importance of stability in the Children’s lives.  It also valued the oldest child’s distinct 
needs as the only sibling who remembered being neglected and 
abused.
4 
Relatives’ claim that the family court disregarded relevant 
evidence is misplaced.  They argue that the court focused only 
 
4  The court found the child’s removal from RCGs’ home, “even with 
prophylactic measures, is not a justifiable risk to [her] emotional health.”
   9 on the HRS § 571-46(b) factors.  Thus, it ignored, or at least 
undervalued, evidence about their financial status and blood 
relationship to the Children.  The court, however, factored the 
finances of both prospective adoptive families.  It also 
considered evidence of Relatives’ kinship to the Children.  This 
evidence, though, did not alter the court’s best interests 
determination. 
IV. 
 Since HRS § 578-8 has no best interests factors and HRS § 571-46(b)’s best interests factors do not entirely align with 
the court’s key inquiry, how does a family court become 
“satisfied . . . [t]he adoption will be for the best interests 
of the individual”?  
  It values the evidence.  Like in any trial. 
  In petitions for adoption and permanent placement, a 
family court should consider all admissible evidence to 
determine the best interests of the individual.  This may include evidence supporting a pertinent best interests factor 
listed in HRS § 571-46(b).  And it may include other relevant 
evidence.
5  Only the rules of evidence confine the family court.  
 
5  We stress that HRS § 571- 46(b)’s factors may be relevant in adoption 
and permanent placement cases.  For instance, courts must consider admissible 
evidence about a prospective adoptive parent’s: “history of sexual or physical abuse of a child,” HRS § 571-4 6(b)(1); “history of neglect or 
emotional abuse of a child,” HRS § 571- 46(b)(2); “past or current drug or 
alcohol abuse,” HRS § 571- 46(b)(13); and “mental health,” HRS § 571-
46(b)(14).   10 We also hold that within this typical trial framework, there are 
no statutory presumptions, no “super-factors,” and no evidence 
that deserves automatic preferential treatment. 
 Our view reflects a central feature of any trial: the fact-
finder – judge or jury - finds facts, weighs and values those 
facts, and finds other facts, the facts of consequence.  The 
dispositive fact of consequence in adoption and permanent 
placement trials is what outcome serves the individual’s best interests.
  Our approach squares with HRS § 578-8, which 
instructs family courts to consider “any evidence as the petitioners and any other properly interested person may wish to 
present.”  (Emphasis added.)  This law’s panoramic outlook suits 
the family court’s broad discretion in best interests 
determinations.  It allows the court to find and weigh any fact 
- under case-specific circumstances - that is helpful to its 
best interests determination.  See, e.g., Matter of Adoption of 
ZEM, 458 P.3d 21, 25 (Wyo. 2020) (“A court may consider numerous 
factors when determining whether an adoption is in the child’s 
best interests. . . .  No single factor is determinative and 
depending on the case, different factors will present a greater 
need for emphasis.  The one constant is that the resolution must 
be in the best interests of the children in that particular 
family.” (cleaned up)); 2 Am. Jur. 2d Adoption § 131 (Nov. 2022 
Update) (“[A] judge may consider a wide range of permissible   11 evidence in determining which placement will serve the child’s 
best interests, and it is for the trial judge to determine the 
weight of the evidence.”). 
V. 
We turn to whether the family court independently reviewed 
DHS’s placement recommendation and properly found that the Children’s adoption by RCGs was in their best interests. 
Relatives maintain that the court rubber-stamped DHS’s 
permanent placement recommendation.  They say the court did not make an independent determination of the Children’s best 
interests.  See In re AS, 132 Hawai‘i at 378, 322 P.3d at 273 
(holding DHS’s placement decisions remain subject to the family 
court’s “independent best interests review”).  The record belies Relatives’ claim. 
The court did not uncritically accept DHS’s placement 
decision.  Rather, the family court meaningfully assessed the 
admissible evidence to determine which adoption served the 
Children’s best interests.  In a 46-page order, the court made 
over 200 findings of fact and 43 conclusions of law.  There was no rubber-stamp. 
The family court’s review contrasts with the court’s 
actions in In re AB, 145 Hawai‘i 498, 517–18, 454 P.3d 439, 458–
59 (2019).  There the court did not independently determine that DHS’s out-of-state permanent placement decision served a child’s   12 best interests.  The court “simply said, ‘All right’ and moved 
on” without considering alternatives to out-of-state placement 
or the decision’s impacts on the child’s relationships and 
stability in Hawai‘ i.  Id.  
Here, we conclude that the family court properly considered 
the admissible evidence and found that adoption and permanent 
placement with RCGs served the Children’s best interests.  The 
court did not abuse its discretion.  See Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai‘i 41, 46, 1 37 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (holding that “the 
family court possesses wide discretion in making its decisions 
and those decision[s] will not be set aside unless there is a 
manifest abuse of discretion”). 
VI. 
We affirm the ICA’s Judgment on Appeal and the Family Court 
of the First Circuit’s April 6, 2021 Order affirming DHS’s  
permanent placement of the Children with RCGs and denying 
Relatives’ adoption petition. 
Francis T. O’Brien 
(Brett A. Ritter on the briefs) 
for petitioner 
 Patrick A. Pascual and 
Julio C. Herrera 
(Ian T. Tsuda and Regina Anne Mormad Shimada on the briefs) f
 or respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna /s/ Michael D. Wilson /s/ Todd W. Eddins 