 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000007 28-FEB-2014 
07:45 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
PAUL C.K. KAEO, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
SCWC-12-0000007
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-12-0000007; CR. NO. 09-1-0719)
 
FEBRUARY 28, 2014
 
NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, McKENNA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This case raises the question of whether the trial
 
court erred in failing to instruct the jury upon the offense of
 
assault in the first degree as an included offense of the charge
 of murder in the second degree. 
The circuit court in this case declined to instruct the
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jury on the defense’s requested instruction on assault in the
 
first degree. The jury returned a verdict of manslaughter, and
 the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the circuit
 court’s judgment. 
We conclude that assault in the first degree is an
 
included offense of murder in the second degree, and the circuit
 erred by not instructing the jury upon the included offense of
 assault in the first degree. Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s
 and circuit court’s judgments, and remand for a new trial.
 
I.
 
A.
 1.
 Paul Kaeo (Paul) was charged with murder in the second 
degree pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 
(1993). The following facts were adduced at trial.
1 
Paul met his future wife Debbie Baker Kaeo (Debbie) in
 
1989. They were married on June 6, 1998. Around the end of
 
2008, Debbie and Paul moved into the home of Debbie’s mother,
 Lucille Baker (Lucille), where they lived together with Lucille
 and Debbie’s brother, Calvin Baker (Calvin), until February 2009.
 In February 2009, Paul learned that Debbie was seeing Charles
 Kahumoku (Charles) and Debbie moved out. Debbie testified that
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn, presiding.
 
2
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
she moved in with Charles. At that time, Debbie was working for 
Roberts Hawai' i as a bus driver. 
Despite their separation, Debbie and Paul continued to
 
communicate from February to May 2009, usually after Debbie and
 
Charles got into arguments. On direct examination, Debbie
 testified that Paul would get upset during these conversations
 and threaten to kill Charles. On cross-examination, however,
 Debbie stated only that she “assum[ed]” Paul had once threatened
 to kill Charles during these conversations and that she could not
 remember mentioning Paul’s threats against Charles to anyone. 
Debbie also testified that she could not remember Paul ever
 asking where Charles lived. 
Calvin also stated that Paul had said he would kill
 
Charles “if he found him.” On cross-examination Calvin stated
 that he never told his sister about Paul’s threats. Calvin also
 confirmed that it was possible Paul actually said “he don’t know
 what might happen” if Paul ever saw Charles, and not that he
 would kill Charles. 
Paul denied ever telling Calvin that he would kill
 
Charles. Paul admitted saying to Calvin that Paul “never like
 see [Charles] because I don’t know what might happen.” Paul
 testified that he still loved Debbie and would take her back if
 she wanted him back. Paul acknowledged that he did not like
 Charles after he found out Charles was sleeping with Debbie.
 
3
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Paul testified that Debbie complained to him about
 
Charles’ drinking, mood swings, and his overprotectiveness of
 
her. Debbie and Paul testified that sometime around the end of
 March or beginning of April 2009, Debbie called Paul “for advice”
 because Charlie had threatened to shoot her. Paul testified that
 it sounded as if “[Debbie] was in the room, and [Charles] was
 locked out, and I could hear him, like, pounding on the door and
 saying that he going kill her if she leave him.” Paul stated
 that Debbie asked him at that time to pick her up, but he was at
 the beach with Calvin, had no car, and Calvin would not lend him
 his car. 
Paul testified that after Debbie called him, he left a
 
message on Charles’ phone asking “why [Charles] hitting on
 [Debbie][?]” Charles called Paul back, and Paul told him “he
 gotta stop, stop hitting her or for sure she’s gonna leave him.” 
Paul told Charles he could hear him threaten to kill Debbie. At
 that point, according to Paul, Charles started yelling and
 swearing at him and Charles said “you know what, I see you on the
 street, I’ll shoot you too.” Paul testified that he then hung up
 the phone because he was scared.
 
Paul testified that another incident of Charles abusing
 
Debbie occurred a few weeks later in the middle of April. Debbie
 admitted that this incident occurred at a bar near the airport
 where Debbie and Charles were having drinks with friends. Debbie
 
4
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that she did not understand why Charles became angry
 
during this incident. However, Paul testified that Debbie said
 to him that “she started talking to this guy at the bar and
 [Charles] got jealous.” Debbie testified that after Charles got
 upset she went to the women’s bathroom. Charles followed her
 into the bathroom and then hit her in the back. Another person
 in the bathroom came out of a stall and told Charles to stop and
 get out. Debbie testified that she got scared and called Paul.
 
Paul testified that he was at work on a night shift
 
that lasted from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. when Debbie called and told
 him what had occurred. Paul told her to come over to his
 workplace. Debbie testified that she ran over to Paul’s
 workplace, which was near the bar, because she did not want to
 get hit again and was afraid she would. 
Paul testified that when Debbie arrived, he had to open
 
a gate at his workplace to let her in. At that point, Debbie and
 Paul saw Charles driving by Paul’s workplace in a truck. Paul
 testified that Debbie stayed at his workplace for a couple hours
 while he worked and then she left. Paul testified that when
 Debbie left, she went back to the bar to meet Charles. 
Paul testified further that he saw Debbie again the
 
next day at Lucille’s house. According to Paul, Debbie said “she
 hate when Charlie do this kind of stuff when – because he always
 do ‘em when he drunk.” Paul testified that Debbie then pulled
 
5
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
down the collar of her turtleneck and showed him “a bruise like
 
someone choked her.” The bruise was not present when Paul saw
 her the night before. Paul told Debbie “you gotta do something
 about it because my hands are tied if you no like be with me[.]”
 Debbie denied that she went to her mother’s house at this time or
 that these events occurred. 
Despite these incidents, Debbie testified that while
 
her relationship with Charles was not perfect, she was happy with
 him. She also stated that it was not “a hard choice choosing
 between Paul and Charles[.]” Debbie testified also that Paul
 never attempted to reconcile his relationship with her or tried
 to persuade her to get back into a relationship with him. 
2.
 
Paul, Calvin, and Debbie all testified that on May 8,
 
2009, Paul and Calvin were at Lucille’s house preparing for a
 family party or baby shower that was scheduled to take place the
 next day. Lucille was in California at this time. Paul
 testified that at approximately 9 a.m., Debbie called him and
 offered to come to the house and help with the cooking. Paul
 testified that he told Debbie to stay at home. 
Debbie testified that on that day Charles picked her up
 
after work and dropped her off at Lucille’s around 4:30 p.m.
 Calvin testified that Paul was in the house and did not speak to
 Charles at this time. Paul testified that because he was almost
 
6
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
done with the cooking he, Debbie, and Calvin just “[hung] out”
 
outside the house in the garage/driveway. Calvin testified they
 drank beer. Debbie confirmed that they spent the evening
 drinking beer and “talking stories” outside of the house in the
 garage/driveway.
 
Paul and Calvin testified that during the evening
 
Debbie’s relationship with Charles was discussed. Paul testified
 that Debbie said she was scared of Charles and “don’t like when
 he’s always mad at her.” Paul and Calvin testified that they
 attempted to convince Debbie to stay over at the house for the
 night. Debbie said she would not mind, but she did not have a
 work uniform for the next day. Paul informed her she had an
 extra work uniform inside. 
Debbie testified that Paul and Calvin brought up the
 
issue of her relationship with Charles. Debbie testified that
 Paul and Calvin tried to convince her to stay over but that she
 “just wanted to go home.” Debbie testified that Paul said she
 looked “scared” and that Paul knew “he threatening you,” to which
 Debbie replied, “what you talking about? I no understand.”
 
At this point, Paul and Calvin testified that they
 
thought Debbie was going to stay over. Paul wanted Debbie to
 stay over because he “cannot see her getting beat – beaten every
 time.” Calvin also testified that he spoke on the phone with
 Charles and told him that Debbie was going to stay over. Calvin
 
7
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that Debbie did not want to go home or go with Charles. 
Debbie and Paul testified that at some point in the
 
evening, Debbie left the house to get pupus but forgot her
 
cellular phone at the house. Paul testified that while Debbie
 was gone, Charles called her phone. Paul answered the phone and
 said “lose the number” and then hung up. Charles called back a
 few minutes later and Paul answered again. This time Paul
 explained that Debbie was going to stay over for the night and
 Calvin would drive her to work and pick her up. Paul testified
 that at this point Charles “started swearing and stuff like that
 and he told me that don’t interfere with my life, I going kill
 you.” That made Paul scared for himself and Debbie. Paul
 testified that he was scared for Debbie because “if she do go
 home, who knows what he might do. I don’t know what he’s capable
 of.”
 
Debbie testified that when she returned she noticed
 
that she had a missed call. Paul told Debbie that Charles had
 called. Debbie did not think it was a “big deal.” Debbie then
 went into the house. Debbie called Charles and asked him to pick
 her up. Debbie wanted to go home at about 9:30 p.m. because she
 had work the next day. 
Paul testified that at about 9:00 p.m. or 9:30 p.m.
 
Charles arrived at Lucille’s house in his truck. Paul testified
 that he did not know Charles was coming. Calvin also testified
 
8
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that he did not know Charles was coming and was surprised when he
 
showed up.
 
Paul testified that Debbie stood up to leave and he
 
pushed her back down. Debbie testified that she stood up, hugged
 both Calvin and Paul goodbye, “was ready to walk out the gate,”
 and then was “flown back” onto the grass behind the garage by
 Paul. Calvin testified that Debbie never stood up. Paul
 testified that he said to Debbie “you’re not going home with this
 guy tonight.” According to Debbie, Paul said “‘You ain’t’ – ‘you
 ain’t fucking leaving.’”
 
Paul testified that the reason he pushed Debbie down
 
was because something might happen to her. Paul testified
 further that, as a result of the conversation he had with Charles
 about Debbie staying over and Charles threatening to kill Paul,
 Charles might be mad and drunk enough to kill Debbie and thus he
 “feared for her life.”
 
Paul testified that he next walked into the street
 
toward Charles’ truck. Paul told Charles “[Debbie] going stay
 over I told you, you know, just go home and pick her up at work.”
 Paul testified that Charles started “yelling and stuff like
 that,” but Paul could not hear him because Charles was in the
 
truck. Paul grabbed a “pipe,”
2 which Calvin described as the
 
2
 Debbie at first described it as a “pipe or something.” Debbie
 
identified State’s Exhibit 1 as the object in Paul’s hand that evening.
(continued...)
 
9
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rebar they used to keep the gate closed so as to keep the dogs in
 
the yard and “started smashing on [Charles’] car.” Paul smashed
 the windshield first, then the passenger side window. Debbie
 testified that she attempted to grab the bar out of Paul’s hand
 but Paul shoved her down again. Paul testified that he pushed
 Debbie down and told her to stay away. He also testified that he
 was not jealous and the attack was “like trying to keep her safe,
 protect – protecting her.” Paul testified that he “never like .
 . . something happen to her” “[b]ecause [Charles] was hurting
 Debbie.”
 
Calvin testified that he could not understand anything
 
Paul was saying. Debbie testified that while Paul was smashing
 Charles’ car, Paul said “he going kill him” “many times.” Debbie
 noticed that Charles looked scared and was not attempting to get
 out of the car. After hitting Charles’ car a number of times,
 Paul testified that he “went onto the driver’s side and started
 jabbing [Charles].” Debbie testified that as Paul walked around
 the truck to the driver’s side, Paul said “I going kill him.” 
Debbie testified that during this time she was “screaming and
 yelling” “stop, just stop.” Debbie testified that she called the
 
2(...continued)
Debbie described it as a peg made out of metal used for holding up tents while
camping. An evidence specialist (Specialist) with the Honolulu Police
Department’s Scientific Investigation Section recovered a two-foot metal bar
that was depicted in State’s Exhibits 19 and 29. Calvin identified the bar in
 State’s Exhibit 19 as the one from Paul’s hand.
 
10
 Paul testified that he jabbed Charles through the open
 
driver side window. Paul stated that he never opened the door
 
while he was jabbing Charles with the bar. Calvin testified that
 he saw Paul “poking” Charles with the bar while Charles was
 
inside the truck.
4    Paul testified that at this point he was only
 
trying to hurt Charles and not kill him:
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
police three times while she was trying to stop Paul from hurting
 
Charles.
 
On cross-examination, Debbie acknowledged that she did
 
not mention Paul saying he would kill Charles while Paul was
 hitting Charles’ car in her written statement or in her half-hour
 interview with the detectives, and she did not remember telling
 this to the grand jury. 
Debbie testified that she told the
 
prosecuting attorney in the case about what Paul said on at least
 
3 one occasion.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. When you were jabbing into there,
what were you trying to do, Paul?
 
[PAUL]: I was trying to hurt him. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Okay. But, I mean, why?
[PAUL]:  Because he was hurting Debbie.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. You said earlier you pushed down
Debbie because you were afraid for her?
[PAUL]:
 Yes, I was afraid for her.
 
3 After Debbie’s testimony concluded, Defense Counsel stated on the
record, out of the presence of the jury, that at no time did the prosecutor’s
office disclose that Debbie had said that Paul said “I going kill him,”
referring to Charles. The Prosecutor related that he could not remember and
 did not know of these statements by Paul prior to that day in court. 
4
 Debbie testified that she again tried to get the bar out of Paul’s
hand again and Paul pushed her down a third time. Paul testified that Debbie
 was not around. Debbie testified that she did not know where Calvin was at
 this point. 
11
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Okay. When you're jabbing the bar into
the truck, you still afraid for her?
[PAUL]: Yes.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: 
Okay. Were you trying to kill him?
[PAUL]:  
No.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
You weren't trying to kill him?
 
[PAUL]:  No
.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. What were you trying to do, Paul, I
mean, what -­[PAUL]: I was just trying to stop him from, you know, taking
her and, who knows, beating her, stuff like that.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Did you, I guess, at any time think about
the kind of injuries that you wanted to inflict?
[PAUL]: At that time I wasn't thinking. My mind was just -­
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
Okay. But you know you weren't trying to
kill him?
 [PAUL]:
 
Yes.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
You were trying to hurt him though?
[PAUL]:  
Yes.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
Okay. But you don't remember how much?
 
[PAUL]:  
No.
 
Paul admitted he knew hitting someone in the head with
 
the bar he hit Charles with could be dangerous, but he denied
 
aiming for Charles’ head, stating that he “just swung wild” and
 “was just jabbing wild[.]” Paul also admitted hitting Charles
 “out of anger[.]” 
Paul testified that he stopped hitting Charles when he
 
saw Charles “go down.” Paul could not hear Charles breathing or
 any “gurgling sounds.” Paul also testified that he “couldn’t see
 blood.” Paul and Calvin testified that at this point Calvin came
 up behind Paul and “told ‘em enough already.”
5 Both testified
 
5
 A neighbor (Neighbor), who was twenty yards away across the
street, testified that he went outside when he heard commotion in the street.
He saw Charles’ truck drive up, saw the door open, and saw someone go into
Charles’ truck from the driver’s side and that “most of their body was into
the truck maybe with their leg still out hanging on the street.” Neighbor
testified that it seemed like a fight was happening in the truck and there was
a pounding sound. Neighbor also heard what sounded like a woman trying to
(continued...)
 
12
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that Calvin took the bar from Paul. Calvin testified that he
 
threw the bar over the car.
 
Paul testified that he said to Calvin that he should
 
take Charles to the hospital because he knew he “beat him real
 bad.” Paul said “I need to do something to help this guy, what I
 did.” Paul then tried to push Charlie over so he could “get in
 and go.” Paul testified that at this point Debbie came up and
 took the keys out of the ignition of the truck. Paul admitted
 that he never actually told Debbie he was planning to take
 Charles to the hospital. 
Debbie testified that when Paul opened the driver’s
 
side door, Charles was slouched over the steering wheel. She
 testified further that Paul then said “Fuck you. Get away. I
 going take him. I going take him.” Debbie testified that Paul
 was trying to start the truck. Debbie took the keys out of the
 truck to prevent Paul from taking Charlie because Debbie was
 worried about Charlie. Paul and Debbie testified that Paul ran
 away after Debbie took the keys. Debbie testified that Charles
 had a pulse and was breathing at this time. According to Debbie
 
5(...continued)
break up the fight. Neighbor testified that he went back inside five minutes
later, “maybe ten at the most.” Neighbor stated that he heard no breaking
glass and did not see anyone strike the truck. Neighbor said it was very dark
and they went back inside because they did not want to intrude on a family
issue.
 
13
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
no emergency personnel showed up for ten more minutes. Paul
 
denied knowing Charles was dead on the night of the incident.6
 
Jeffery Jacobson (Jacobson), who responded to the
 
incident, testified that he arrived on the scene in an ambulance
 at about 9:50 p.m. Jacobson testified that the passenger window
 “looked shattered” and the windshield of Charles’ truck was
 damaged. He then noticed that Charles’ “feet were above the
 steering wheel . . . and he was lying at an angle down where his
 head was in the passenger seat[.]” Jacobson checked Charles’
 pulse but “no pulse was indicated.” Charles also was
 unresponsive and not breathing. He attempted to revive Charles
 with CPR and adrenalin, but Charles did not return to spontaneous
 respirations or spontaneous pulse. Jacobson took Charles to
 Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center, the nearest
 
7
appropriate facility. Dr. Gayle Suzuki (Dr. Suzuki),  a medical
examiner, testified that Charles was pronounced dead on May 8,
 2009.
 
Dr. Suzuki testified that on May 10, 2009, she
 
conducted an autopsy of Charles. 
She identified numerous
 
external wounds to Charles’ head, such as bruises and scrapes on
 the middle part of his forehead, a scrape over his right eyebrow
 
6
 Paul acknowledged that he was the person who killed Charles. 
7
 Dr. Suzuki was offered as an expert “in the field of anatomical,
clinical and forensic pathology, qualified to give opinions on things like
manner of death, mechanism of injury, etcetera.” 
14
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and a bruise by his right eye. Charles also had a broken nose
 
and circular cuts on his nose and below his left jaw. Dr. Suzuki
 testified that the external head wounds alone were not fatal.
 
On his torso, Charles had a “semicircular scrape” to
 
the left side of his chest, scrapes and bruises on his back
 shoulder blades, along the back of his forearm and a “seven inch
 . . . bruise on the left side of his torso[.]” Charles had no
 external injuries from the waist down. Dr. Suzuki testified that
 Charles’ wounds were consistent with Charles being attacked from
 the left side. She described many of the arm wounds as defensive
 type injuries.
 
Dr. Suzuki also determined that there were internal
 
injuries to Charles’ head. She described these injuries as
 “rotational type injuries” resulting in a “shearing and
 stretching of the brain cells itself.” Dr. Suzuki testified that
 these rotational type injuries could result in a range of
 injuries, from concussions to death. In this case, the shearing
 resulted in bleeding around blood vessels on the brain, which
 indicated an injury to the brain. Dr. Suzuki testified that
 these injuries were caused by blunt force trauma, which was the
 cause of Charles’ death. She testified that there was no skull
 fracture, but external injuries would not necessarily occur even
 where a person died from blunt force trauma to the head. 
15
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Dr. Suzuki testified that Charles had a blood alcohol
 
concentration (BAC) of .221. She stated that Charles’ head
 
injury alone was sufficient to cause his death and that even
 without the alcohol in his system, Charles would have died. 
[Id.]
 
On cross-examination, Dr. Suzuki discussed alcohol
 
concussion syndrome (ACS). She described ACS as a “mechanism”
 that caused persons with BACs from .22 to .33 to suddenly stop
 breathing and die after suffering an otherwise non-fatal blow to
 the head. She stated, however, that the prior cases of ACS,
 unlike the instant case, did not involve physical damage to the
 brain itself. Dr. Suzuki testified that she could not rule out
 alcohol as a factor contributing to Charles’ death, but she still
 believed “to a reasonable medical degree” of certainty that even
 without the alcohol, Charles would have died. However, she
 conceded that she was not “a hundred percent absolute[ly]”
 certain that a person with Charles’ injuries and no alcohol in
 their system would also have died.
 
16
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B.
 
Prior to trial, Paul submitted Defendant’s Requested
 
Jury Instructions numbers 5 and 6 on assault in the first degree8
 
and assault in the second degree.9
 
Before testimony began, the parties and the court
 
discussed jury instructions. The court “reserved” the issue of
 
8 Defendant’s Jury Instruction No. 5 reads as follows:
 
If and only if you find Paul Kaeo not guilty of
Manslaughter, or you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict
as to this offense, then you must consider whether the
defendant is guilty or not guilty of the included offense of
Assault in the First Degree.
A person commits the offense of Assault in the First
Degree if he intentionally or knowingly causes serious
bodily injury to another person.
There are two material elements to the offense of
 
Assault in the First Degree, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These two elements are:
 1. That, on or about May 8, 2009, in the City and
county of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, the Defendant caused
serious bodily injury to another person; and
2. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly.
 
9 Defendant’s Jury Instruction No. 6 read as follows:
 
If and only if you find Paul Kaeo not guilty of
Assault in the First Degree, or you are unable to reach a
unanimous verdict as to this offense, then you must consider
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of the
included offense of Assault in the Second Degree.
A person commits the offense of Assault in the Second
Degree if he intentionally or knowingly causes substantial
bodily injury to another person.
There are two material elements to the offense of
 
Assault in the Second Degree, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These two elements are:
 1. That, on or about May 8, 2009, in the City and
county of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, the Defendant caused
substantial bodily injury to another person; and
2. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly.
 
17
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
whether to give Defendant’s Requested Jury Instructions numbers 5
 
and 6. Later that day the court informed the parties that the
 court would not be submitting to the jury the assault in the
 first degree instructions, which the court initially had included
 in its own instructions. The defense objected, noting that Paul
 had requested both assault in the first degree and assault in the
 second degree. The defense argued that under HRS § 701-109(4)(a)
 or (c), but especially (c), the court should give instructions
 for both assault in the first degree and assault in the second
 degree. The defense contended that this case “exactly” fits the
 description of an “included” offense in HRS § 701-109(4)(c),
 which the defense described as one that “differs from the offense
 charged only in the respect that a less serious injury or
 different state of mind suffices to establish its commission.”
 
The prosecution argued that assault in the first degree
 
not be given. The prosecution contended that assault in the
 first degree would “have to go through a manslaughter verdict or
 analysis,” which requires a reckless state of mind and assault in
 the first degree has an intentional or knowing state of mind.
 
The court based its decision not to give the assault 
instruction on State v. Robinson, 82 Hawai' i 304, 922 P.2d 358 
(1996) and State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 865 P.2d 157, (1994). The court characterized the holding in Robinson as “you don’t get an assault third lesser off an assault one unless there is a 
18
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rational basis to find that the injury did not constitute serious
 
bodily injury but actually in fact constituted bodily injury.” 
The court read Alston to hold that HRS § 701-109(4)(c) “generally
 require[s] the same end result.” The court concluded that when
 Alston and Robinson are “combined” they “seem to suggest” that
 “when it comes to murder and a dead person . . . you cannot get
 to a different injury, which is pure injury, serious bodily
 injury, substantial bodily injury.” The court accordingly based
 its decision not to include the proposed assault instructions
 solely on its interpretation of the law and not based on the
 facts presented at trial.
 
Thus, the court gave instructions to the jury on murder
 
in the second degree, reckless manslaughter, and extreme mental
 or emotional disturbance manslaughter. During closing arguments
 the defense argued that if the jury believed Paul only assaulted
 Charles and did not intend to kill him, the jury should find Paul
 not guilty because they had not been instructed on assault. The
 Court interrupted the defense to say that assault was not a
 consideration:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Now, if you say, no, it wasn't a jealous
rage, you gotta -- the other path you gotta look at, and
this is actually probably where you're supposed to start,
okay, is same thing. Okay? Was it murder? If it wasn't
murder, was it manslaughter? Okay.
Now, generally speaking, you guys know where this line
goes, right? There's -- I mean, you know, there's assaults
but you have no instructions for assaults so you cannot
consider any kind of assault. Okay? So even if you say to
yourselves, and this is just an assault, I mean, I don't
think he intended to kill him or anything like that, I don't
 
19
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
think he acted recklessly, that's an assault. But you don't
have an instruction, okay? So that would mean you're here,
okay? You're not guilty. Now if anywhere along this line
you stop, you say, okay –
THE COURT: Assault is not to be – assault is not a
 
consideration. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's right. That's what I said. Okay.
So if you stop anywhere along this line, you say murder or
manslaughter, then you gotta consider the defenses that were
raised. Okay?
 
(Emphasis added).
 
On August 8, 2011, the jury convicted Paul of reckless
 
manslaughter. On December 5, 2011, the court sentenced Paul to
 
twenty years imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of six years
 and eight months. Paul appealed to the ICA. 
C.
 
10
Paul raised a single relevant  point of error on
appeal to the ICA: the lower court erred in refusing to submit
 defendant’s requested jury instructions regarding the included
 offense of assault in the first degree.
 
Paul argued that the jury should have been instructed
 
on assault in the first degree pursuant to HRS § 701-109(4)(c)
 
10 As part of his first point of error raised to the ICA, Paul also
contended that the lower court erred in refusing to submit defendant’s
requested jury instructions on assault in the second degree. In light of our
determination that the jury should have been given an instruction on assault
in the first degree as a lesser included of murder in the second degree, it is
unnecessary to discuss this argument.
Paul raised two additional points of error to the ICA. First,
“The lower court abused its discretion by refusing to allow evidence of the
familial relationship between the decedent and the State’s primary witness.”
This point is not raised in the Application. Second, the circuit court
violated his “constitutional right to present a complete defense by precluding
[his] attorney from arguing this was an assault case.” In light of our
disposition of Paul’s primary argument in the Application, it is unnecessary
to discuss this issue.
 
20
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
because “assault ‘differs from [murder] only in the respect that
 
a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same person . . .
 suffices to establish its commission.’” (Emphasis added). Paul
 contended that the commentaries to the Model Penal Code (MPC)
 supported this argument as the MPC commentaries specifically
 state that “Paragraph (c) allows conviction of an offense
 consisting of an intentional infliction of bodily harm where the
 charge is intentional homicide[.]” Thus, “[t]he fact that the
 defendant’s conduct caused an injury which resulted in death does
 not preclude Assault as an included offense.” 
Paul further argued that the court erred in its
 
interpretation of Alston’s “end result” analysis because “death
 is a form of injury,” and thus assault and Murder could have the
 same “end result.” Paul reasoned that “the issue of the included
 offenses turns on whether the evidence supports a rational
 conclusion that the defendant did not intentionally or knowingly
 cause a death, but instead, acted with the state of mind to
 commit assault.” Paul maintained that “[u]nder the principles of
 criminal law, an individual cannot be adjudged guilty without
 
proof that he acted with the requisite criminal mens rea to cause
 the prohibited harm or injury,” and “[t]he penal law does not, in
 
most instances, condemn a person’s conduct alone.” Paul stated
 that there was “a rational basis for concluding that he did not
 contemplate killing [Charles], and thus he is entitled to the
 
21
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
requested instructions on Assault.” Paul maintained that HRS §
 
701-109(4) does not indicate in any way that the “end result, in
 this case death, controls the included instructions that are
 given.” 
Paul distinguished Robinson, which involved a dispute
 
over whether the defendant caused the injuries and not a dispute
 as to the defendant’s state of mind. In this case, by contrast,
 the central question is whether the evidence supports a finding
 that Paul only intended to assault Charles and not kill him. 
The prosecution responded that the trial court need not
 
instruct the jury on a lesser included offense “unless there is a
 rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the
 defendant of the offense charged and convicting him of the
 included offense.” The prosecution argued that Paul admitted
 trying to hurt Charles because Charles was hurting Debbie and
 Paul admitted causing the injuries to Charles and to killing
 Charles. Paul admitted that “At that time I wasn’t thinking. My
 mind was just --.” Paul knew “hitting somebody in the head with
 the bar can be dangerous and deadly.” Finally, Paul admitted
 that “he ‘just swung wild,’” at any part of Charles’ body and
 “beat [Charles] real bad” because Paul was angry. The
 prosecution concluded that based on this evidence “there was no
 rational basis to support the contention that the jury could have
 
22
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rationally acquitted Defendant of Reckless Manslaughter and
 
convicted him of [Assault in the First Degree].” 
The ICA issued a Summary Disposition Order (SDO)
 
affirming the circuit court judgment (judgment) relying on the
 
holding in State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), 
that “when the jury convicts the defendant of the charged offense
 
or a greater included offense, a trial court’s failure to
 instruct on a lesser included offense is a harmless error.”
11
 
II.
 
In his Application for Writ of Certiorari, Paul raises
 
12
a single  point of error:
The ICA gravely erred in holding that the circuit court’s
failure to instruct the jury on the lesser-included assault
offenses was a harmless error.
 
A.
 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court judgment solely on
 
the grounds that, pursuant to Haanio, the court’s failure to
 
instruct on assault in the first degree was harmless because the
 jury convicted Paul of manslaughter. After the ICA issued its
 
11 The ICA also found that the court’s interruption of the defense’s
closing arguments concerning assault did not disturb or dispute Paul’s theory
that the jury “must acquit if they believe [Paul] did not act with the
requisite intent for murder or manslaughter, and did not violate [Paul’s]
right to present a complete defense. 
12
 Paul also raises as a sub-point that his federal and Hawai' i 
constitutional rights to present a defense and to effective assistance ofcounsel were violated by the court’s foreclosing his counsel from arguing tothe jury the lesser included offenses of assault in the first degree andassault in the second degree. 
23
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
SDO, this court held that “Haanio is overruled to the extent that
 
it holds the trial court’s error in failing to give included
 offense instructions is harmless if the defendant was convicted
 of the charged offense or of a greater included offense.” State
 
v. Flores, 131 Hawai' i 43, __, 314 P.3d 120, 134 (2013). 
In Flores, the issue was whether the trial court should 
have instructed the jury on unlawful imprisonment in the first degree when the defendant was charged with and convicted of the 
crime of kidnapping. Flores, 131 Hawai' i at __, 314 P.3d at 121, 
128. After establishing that unlawful imprisonment in the first
 
degree was a lesser included offense of kidnapping and that the
 
evidence in the case presented a rational basis for the jury to
 acquit Flores on kidnapping and convict him of unlawful
 imprisonment in the first degree, the Flores court held that the
 trial court’s failure to instruct on unlawful imprisonment was
 not harmless simply because the defendant was convicted of the
 
greater offense. Flores, 131 Hawai' i at __, 314 P.3d at 121-135. 
Instead, the court held that there was a rational basis for the 
jury to find Flores guilty of unlawful imprisonment in the first degree, had the jury been given the appropriate instruction. Id. 
at, 314 P.3d at 135. Thus, “[t]he failure to instruct the jury on a lesser included offense for which the evidence provides a rational basis warrants vacation of the defendant’s conviction.” 
24
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Id.
 
In this case, Paul was charged with murder in the
 
second degree and convicted of the lesser included offense of
 
reckless manslaughter. Pursuant to Flores, if assault in the
 first degree is a lesser included offense of murder in the second
 degree, and there was a rational basis in the evidence for
 acquitting Paul of murder in the second degree and convicting him
 of the included offense of assault in the first degree, then the
 court’s failure to instruct on the included offense is subject to
 a harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard.
 
B.
 
“[A]n offense is a lesser included offense of another
 
if it satisfies the requirements set forth in HRS § 701-109(4)
 which codifies the common law doctrine of lesser included
 offenses.” State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 532-33, 865 P.2d 157,
 
166 (1994) (quotations, citations, and brackets omitted). HRS §
 701-109(4) provides in relevant part: 
A defendant may be convicted of an offense included in an
offense charged in the indictment or the information. An
offense is so included when:
 
. . . .
 (c)It differs from the offense charged only in the respect
that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same
person, property, or public interest or a different state of
mind indicating lesser degree of culpability suffices to
establish its commission. 
HRS § 701-109(4) (1993). Each subsection of the statute
 
“requires alternative analyses.” Alston, 75 Haw. at 533, 865 P.d
 
25
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at 166 (citing State v. Burdett, 70 Haw. 85, 87, 762 P.2d 164,
 
166 (1988)). In particular, subsection (c) “expands the
 doctrine of lesser included offenses to include crimes that
 require a . . . less serious injury or risk of injury.” Burdett,
 
70 Haw. at 90, 762 P.2d at 167. 
“The degree of culpability, degree of injury or risk of
 
injury and the end result are some of the factors considered in
 determining whether an offense is included in another under HRS §
 701-109(4)(c).” State v. Kupau (Kupau I), 63 Haw. 1, 7, 620 P.2d
 
250, 254 (1980). In this case, the degree of culpability, the
 end result, the degree of injury or risk of injury and the
 legislative history all strongly indicate that assault in the
 first degree is a lesser included offense of murder in the second
 degree.
 
1.
 
First, “[r]egarding the degree of culpability, the rule
 
is that the lesser included offense cannot have a mental state
 greater than or different from that which is required for the
 charged offense.” Alston, 75 Haw. at 534, 865 P.2d at 166. For
 
example, in Kupau I, the court held that “harassment has a
 greater mental state than assault in the third degree” because
 “[h]arassment requires a state of mind that has the intent to
 harass, annoy or alarm, while assault requires a mental state
 that is intentional, knowing or reckless.” 63 Haw. at 6, 620
 
26
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.2d at 254. Likewise, harassment “has a more culpable mental 
state than terroristic threatening in the first degree” because the latter “requires a mental state that is intentional or 
reckless.” Burdett, 70 Hawai' i at 88, 762 P.2d at 166-167. 
In both Kupau I and Burdett, the court noted that the
 
Commentary on HRS § 702-208 states that intent, knowledge,
 
recklessness, and negligence are in descending order of
 culpability. Kupau I, 63 Haw. at 6 n.5, 620 P.2d at 253 n.5;
 
Burdett, 70 Hawai' i at 88-89, 752 P.2d at 167. Thus, the degree 
of culpability test refers to the state of mind—intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently—required to establish an element of an offense pursuant to HRS § 702-204. 
In this case, murder in the second degree and assault
 
in the first degree both require an intentional or knowing state
 of mind. 
In Alston, the court held that terroristic threatening 
is not a lesser included offense of intimidating a witness, in part because the court determined that the “two offenses have 
‘different’ mens rea requirements.” 75 Hawai' i at 534, 865 P.2d 
at 166. The court first noted that terroristic threatening can 
be committed with the lesser mental state of recklessness, while intimidating a witness requires an intentional mental state. Id. 
Thus, terroristic threatening does not have a mental state 
27
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
greater than that required for intimidating a witness. However,
 
the court held that the two offenses have “different” mental
 state requirements because “intimidating a witness requires the
 intent to cause another’s absence from an official proceeding,
 and terroristic threatening requires the intent to cause, or
 recklessness in causing, terror.” Id. 
Murder in the second degree and assault in the first
 
degree do not require “different” mental states under the Alston
 analysis. To prove the offense of murder in the second degree,
 the State must establish that “the person intentionally or
 knowingly cause[d] the death of another person.” HRS § 707­701.5(a). To prove the offense of assault in the first degree,
 the State must show that the “person intentionally or knowingly
 cause[d] serious bodily injury to another person.” HRS § 707­710(1).
 
Therefore, assault in the first degree does not have a
 
mental state greater than or different from that which is
 required for murder in the second degree.
 
2.
 
Second, subsection (c) “provides that a crime can be a
 
lesser included offense when a less serious injury or risk of
 injury to the same person is involved.” Burdett, 70 Haw. at 91,
 
762 P.2d at 168. See Kupau I, 63 Haw. at 8, 620 P.2d at 254
 
(injury resulting from harassment is different from, and
 
28
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
therefore not less serious than injury received from assault in
 
the third degree, because “[a]lthough harassment requires a
 physical touching, [the statute] is concerned with the offensive
 nature of the touching to one’s sensibilities”). 
Both murder in the second degree and assault in the
 
first degree require that the person intentionally or knowingly
 cause physical harm to another. They differ in that assault in
 the first degree requires a “less serious injury or risk of
 injury to the same person,” consistent with HRS § 701-109(4)(c).
 If a person “causes the death of another” under HRS § 707­701.5(a), then the person will necessarily have caused a “bodily
 injury which creates a substantial risk of death” under HRS §§
 707-710(1) and 707-700 (emphasis added). See Young v. State, 605
 
S.W.2d 550, 552 (Tex. Crim. App. 1979) (“one cannot intentionally
 or knowingly cause the death of another without committing an act
 clearly dangerous to human life”).
13
 
“HRS [§] 701-109(4) has been taken almost verbatim from
 
the Proposed Official Draft of the Model Penal Code, [§] 1.07(4)
 (1962).” Kupau I, 63 Haw. at 4, 620 P.2d at 252. The commentary
 
13
 The Hawai' i Penal Code is patterned after the Model Penal Code.
See State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai' i 127, 140 n.22, 890 P.2d 1167, 1180 n.22
(1995). 
The Model Penal Code was also “highly influential” in the
development of the Texas Penal Code. See Thompson v. State, 236 S.W.3d 787,
797 (Tex. Crim. App. 2007) and Brown v. State, 955 S.W.2d 276, 284 (Tex. Crim.
App. 1997) (“Because the Legislature expressed an intent to model our Code
after the Model Penal Code, we may also look to the Model Code for
guidance.”).
 
29
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the Model Penal Code (MPC) § 1.07(4) expressly provides that
 
“Paragraph (c) allows conviction of an offense consisting of an
 intentional infliction of bodily harm where the charge is
 intentional homicide[.]” MPC § 1.07 cmt. 5 (Revised Comments
 1985) (emphasis added).
 
The MPC defines criminal homicide as “purposely,
 
knowingly, recklessly or negligently caus[ing] the death of
 another human being.” MPC § 210.1(1). Criminal homicide
 constitutes murder when “it is committed purposely or knowingly.” 
MPC § 210.2(1). Under the MPC, purposely is equivalent to
 “intentionally” or “with intent.” MPC § 1.13(12). See MPC §
 
2.02(2)(a) (defining general requirements of culpability). 
Accordingly, the MPC formulation of murder is identical
 
to the definition of murder in the second degree under HRS § 707­701.5 (intentionally or knowingly causing the death of another
 person). The MPC also defines “aggravated assault” as
 “purposely, knowingly or recklessly” causing “serious bodily
 injury,” MPC § 211.1(2)(a) (Revised Commentaries 1980), similar
 to HRS § 707-710 (intentionally or knowingly causing serious
 bodily injury). 
Thus, consistent with the MPC, HRS § 701-109(4) allows
 
for a conviction of assault in the first degree where the charge
 is murder in the second degree. See State v. Box, 626 N.E.2d
 
996, 1000 (Ohio Ct. App. 1993) (holding that “felonious assault,”
 
30
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defined as “knowingly . . . caus[ing] serious physical harm to
 
another,” is a lesser included offense of aggravated murder,
 defined as “purposely, and with prior calculation and design,
 caus[ing] the death of another”).
14 See also Hall v. State, 295
 
S.E.2d 194, 195 (Ga. App. 1982) (holding that aggravated assault
 with intent to commit murder may be charged as a lesser included
 offense of murder).
15
 
Furthermore, finding that assault in the first degree
 
is a less serious degree of injury or risk of injury than murder
 in the second degree is consistent with the concept that a
 defendant may act intentionally or knowingly with respect to the
 conduct, but not as to the result of the conduct. For example,
 
in State v. Kupau (Kupau II), 76 Hawai' i 387, 391, 879 P.2d 492, 
496 (1994), overruled on other grounds by State v. Haanio, 94
 Hawai'i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001), in the context of an assault 
case, the court explained that the defendant could have acted
 
intentionally or knowingly with respect to his conduct, and the
 victim could have in fact suffered substantial bodily injury as a
 result thereof. However, if the defendant did not act
 intentionally or knowingly with respect to that result of
 
14
 “Ohio's statutory definitions of criminal offenses in the Revised
Code are based largely upon the American Law Institute's Model Penal Code.”
State v. Brooks, 542 N.E.2d 636, 641 (Ohio 1989). 
15
 “[T]he present Criminal Code was based in large measure on the
Model Penal Code.” Grace v. State, 200 S.E.2d 248, 255 (Ga. 1973). 
31
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
substantial bodily injury, but only acted recklessly with respect
 
to the result, then the defendant “may, depending upon the
 circumstances,” only be guilty of the lesser included offense of
 assault in the third degree (requiring intentional, knowing or
 reckless state of mind) rather than the charged offense of
 assault in the second degree (requiring intentional or knowing
 state of mind).
16 Id. at 391-92, 879 P.2d at 496-97.
 
By the same reasoning, if there is a rational basis in
 
the evidence to prove that the defendant acted intentionally or
 knowingly with respect to the conduct of causing serious bodily
 injury, but the defendant did not act intentionally or knowingly
 with respect to the result of death, then an assault in the first
 degree instruction should be given. 
The circuit court in this case did not give the lesser
 
included instruction on assault because murder results in death
 while assault does not result in death. However, as stated, in
 both situations, serious bodily injury was caused to another
 person; but in a murder prosecution, the serious bodily injury
 
16 The Kupau II court interpreted HRS § 707-711(1) (Supp. 1992), 
which provided that a person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if the person “intentionally or knowingly causes substantial bodilyinjury to another.” Kupau II, 76 Hawai' i at 388, 388 n.1, 879 P.2d at 493,
493 n.1. HRS § 707-712 (1985) provided that a person commits the offense ofassault in the third degree if the person “intentionally, knowingly, orrecklessly causes bodily injury to another person.” Kupau II, 76 Hawai' i at 
388 n.3, 879 P.2d at 493 n.3.
The current statute provides, as it did on May 8, 2009, that
assault in the second degree is committed if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes substantial bodily injury to another, or if the person
recklessly causes serious or substantial bodily injury to another. HRS § 707­711(1) (1993). 
32
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
has resulted in death. It would be illogical for a court’s
 
submission of a jury instruction on assault in the first degree
 to depend upon the fortuity of the victim living or dying as a
 result of the same injuries. That is, in two situations the
 defendant could have the identical intent with respect to the
 conduct of causing serious bodily injury. However, if in one
 situation the victim receives medical assistance and lives, the
 jury is instructed on the lesser offense of assault in the first
 degree. In the identical situation, where the victim does not
 receive medical care and dies, the jury is not so instructed. 
Under the same reasoning, the timing of the trial could determine
 whether the instruction on assault is given, depending on whether
 the victim eventually succumbs to the injuries. 
Accordingly, the offense of assault in the first degree
 
differs from the offense of murder in the second degree only in
 the respect that a less serious injury (i.e. substantial risk of
 death versus death) suffices to establish its commission.
 
3.
 
Third, we consider the end result to determine whether
 
an offense is included in another. “The Commentary to HRS § 701­109 and this court in Kupau [I] indicated that the lesser
 included offense should produce the same end result as the
 charged offense.” Burdett, 70 Haw. at 89, 762 P.2d at 167. The
 
“end result” refers to the result of the criminal act. For
 
33
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
example, negligent homicide has the same end result as murder
 
under HRS § 701-109(c). Commentary to HRS § 701-109.
 
However, this court has never stated that the “end
 
result” factor is dispositive. The end result is only one of the
 
factors that can be considered in determining whether one offense
 is included in another. See State v. Woicek, 63 Haw. 548, 551,
 
632 P.2d 654, 656 (1981) (“some of the factors that can be
 considered in determining whether an offense is included in
 another are the degree of culpability, the end result and
 legislative scheme”) (emphasis added).
 
In Kupau I, the court found that harassment and assault
 
in the third degree do not produce the same end result, as the
 end result of assault is bodily injury, and harassment has no
 such result. 63 Haw. at 7, 620 P.2d at 254. The court further
 noted that the evidence in that case showed that the victim
 “suffered mental anxiety as a result of the incident, but not
 bodily injury as would result from assault.” Id. 
In this case, the circuit court relied on Alston as a
 
basis for its determination that “the end result” of assault and
 murder are different because murder
 involves a “dead person”
 
whereas assault involves “pure injury.”17 In Alston, the court found
 
17
 The circuit court “combine[d]” Alston and Robinson to reach this
 
conclusion. Robinson, however, was decided on the grounds that the defendant
“points to evidence that the victim suffered bodily injury as well as serious
bodily injury” but offered no theory under which the victim suffered only
(continued...)
 
34
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
that the terroristic threatening offense and intimidating a
 
witness offense have “distinct” end results. 75 Haw. at 535, 865
 P.2d at 167. The court explained that “[t]heoretically,
 terroristic threatening produces a psychological injury to the
 person threatened,” whereas “intimidating a witness results in
 the absence of the person threatened from an official proceeding
 to which he or she was legally summoned.” Id. (emphases added). 
“Stated differently in the context of the legislative
 classification, terroristic threatening produces a personal
 injury while intimidating a witness impairs the administration of
 a public function.” Id. (emphasis added). 
Thus, the focus in Alston was on the nature of the
 
harm; i.e. psychological injury versus physical absence of the
 person from judicial proceedings. The court referred to the
 different legislative classification of the offenses as a way of
 emphasizing the distinct nature of the harm for each offense. 
This is similar to the court’s approach in Burdett, in which the
 court explained that the end results of harassment and
 terroristic threatening are similar but distinct, because
 “terroristic threatening involves threats and psychological
 
17(...continued)
bodily injury and no serious bodily injury. 82 Hawai' i at 314, 922 P.2d at
368. In other words, the defendant in Robinson presented no evidence that she
could be acquitted of assault in the first degree and convicted of assault in
the third degree. Id. In this case, as discussed infra, there was sufficient
evidence for the jury to conclude that Paul intentionally or knowingly
committed assault but did not intend to cause Charles’ death.
 
35
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rather than actual physical harm, while the harassment statute
 
seeks to preserve public peace and prohibits insults or
 challenges likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response.” 
70 Haw. at 89, 762 P.2d at 167. 
Whereas Kupau, Burdett, and Alston involved offenses in 
which the end results were distinct due to the different legislative purposes for the offenses, assault and murder are both classified as offenses against the person, and both result in actual physical harm to a person. Cf. State v. Kinnane, 79 
Hawai'i 46, 56, 897 P.2d 973, 983 (1995) (finding the end results 
of attempted sexual assault in the second degree and sexual assault in the fourth degree are the same because “[i]n both instances the victim is placed in jeopardy of being injured or is being injured by the defendant’s conduct,” even though sexual assault in the fourth degree “envisions a less serious injury or risk of injury [(sexual contact)] than attempted sexual assault in the second degree [(risk of sexual penetration)]”). The “end result” factor therefore weighs in favor of finding that assault in the first degree is a lesser included offense of murder in the second degree. 
4.
 
Finally, the court may consider the legislative
 
statutory scheme for both offenses in determining whether one is
 a lesser included offense of the other. This court has
 
36
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
considered whether the offenses are placed in separate categories 
under the Hawai' i Penal Code. See Kupau I, 63 Haw. at 7, 620 
P.2d at 254 (“the structure of the Hawai' i Penal Code places the 
offenses of harassment and assault in the third degree in 
separate categories,” with the former placed in the chapter of “Offenses Against Public Order” and the latter placed in the chapter of “Offenses Against Persons”); Alston, 75 Haw. at 534, 865 P.2d at 166 (“terroristic threatening is classified as an offense against the person in HRS chapter 707, while intimidating a witness is classified as an offense against public 
administration in HRS chapter 710”). Separate classification of offenses under the Penal Code “indicates that different societal 
interests were intended to be protected[.]” Kupau, 63 Haw. at 7, 
620 P.2d at 254. 
In this case, assault in the first degree and murder in
 
the second degree are both classified as offenses against persons
 under HRS Chapter 707. 
5.
 
The analysis under HRS § 701-109(4)(c) demonstrates
 
that assault in the first degree differs from murder in the
 second degree only in that assault in the first degree involves a
 less serious injury or risk of injury. Assault in the first
 degree does not have a mental state different from that required
 
37
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
for murder in the second degree; both require an intentional or
 
knowing mental state. Both offenses have the same end result,
 given that both result in physical harm to the person. Assault
 in the first degree results in a lesser degree of harm than
 murder in the second degree. Finally, both offenses are part of
 the same legislative statutory scheme under “Offenses Against the
 Person.” Thus, assault in the first degree is a lesser included
 offense of murder in the second degree under HRS § 701-109(4)(c). 
C.
 
The question then becomes whether there was a rational 
basis in the evidence to acquit Paul of murder in the second 
degree and convict him of assault in the first degree. Flores, 
131 Hawai' i at __, 314 P.3d at 130. 
“Jury instructions on lesser-included offenses must be
 
given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a
 
verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and
 convicting the defendant of the included offense.” Id. at __, 
314 P.3d at 128. “[J]urors are at liberty to believe all, none, 
or part of the evidence as they see fit.” Haanio, 94 Hawai' i at 
415, 16 P.3d at 256. 
In this case, there was a rational basis for acquitting
 
Paul of the murder charge and convicting him of assault in the
 
38
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
first degree.18 First, Paul testified that while he was trying
 
to hurt Charles, he did not intend to kill him. Had the jury
 
believed Paul’s testimony, the jury would have had a rational
 basis for finding that Paul did not intentionally or knowingly
 cause Charles’ death. Paul testified that he was trying to
 “hurt” Charles. Paul stated he did not know “how much” he was
 trying to hurt Charles. Paul also said that “At that time I
 wasn’t thinking. My mind was just --.” 
Additionally, the circumstances of the incident could
 
have led the jury to believe that Paul did not intentionally or
 knowingly cause Charles’ death. The offense was committed with a
 metal bar that kept the gate closed to keep the dogs in the yard,
 which provides some evidentiary support that Paul did not plan to
 
18 The dissent contends that “neither party here advocated for the
approach taken by the majority.” Dissenting Opinion at 3-4. This is
 
incorrect. 
At trial, during the settlement of the jury instructions, defense
counsel argued to the court that “an offense is so included when it differs
from the offense charged only in the respect that a less serious injury or
different state of mind suffices to establish its commission. That’s exactly
what we have here.” 
In his first point of the Statement of the Points Relied Upon,
Paul argued that, “The requested Assault instructions should have been
submitted to the jury pursuant to HRS § 701-109(4)(a) as assault ‘is
established by proof of the same or less than all the facts required to
establish’ murder.” 
In the argument section of his Opening Brief, Paul stated the
following: “Paul’s requests from the lower court for first-and second-degree
Assault as lesser-included offenses of Murder in the Second Degree is
precisely because the Assaults involve ‘less serious injuries to the same
person,’ and because they also involve a ‘different state of mind indicating a
lesser degree of culpability.’” 
39
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
intentionally or knowingly cause Charles’ death.19 Paul’s
 
initial focus was breaking the car windshield and windows and not
 
on attacking Charles’ person.
 
It also appears that Paul never opened the car door to
 
attack Charles. Consistent with the attack being carried out
 through the window, Calvin testified that Paul was “poking” at
 Charles. Paul also testified that he “jabbed” or “was jabbing”
 at Charles. 
While Paul acknowledged that he knew hitting someone in
 
the head with the bar could cause death, he testified that at the
 time he was attacking Charles he did not aim for any particular
 part of Charles’ body. Some of Charles’ wounds were consistent
 with being attacked from outside the driver-side door and were
 described by Dr. Suzuki as “defensive type injuries.” She also
 testified that there were no skull fractures. 
The incident occurred at 9:00 or 9:30 at night. Paul
 
described the scene as “dark.” Similarly, a neighbor testified
 that “the street was dim. Where everything took place was very
 dark as well.” Paul also testified that he “couldn’t see blood.” 
Under the circumstances, Paul may not have been aware where his
 jabs were landing. 
19
 While plan is not an element of the offense of murder in the
second degree, the lack of a plan may make it more likely that Paul did not
intend to cause Charles’ death. 
40
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Paul also testified that he intended to take Charles to
 
the hospital when Debbie took the keys from the truck. Intending
 
to take a person to the hospital would also provide evidentiary
 support that Paul did not intentionally or knowingly cause
 Charles’ death. Furthermore, when Paul was in the truck and the
 keys were taken by Debbie, Paul was no longer in possession of
 the bar, as it had been taken from him by Calvin. Debbie also
 testified that when the incident ended Charles had a pulse and
 was breathing.
 
Furthermore, the testimony was conflicting as to
 
whether Paul said he would kill Charles. Calvin testified that
 Paul said prior to the day of the incident that he would “kill”
 Charles if he ever saw him. However, Calvin acknowledged that
 Paul could have said “he don’t know what might happen” if he saw
 Charles. Paul denied telling Calvin that Paul wanted to kill
 Charles. Debbie testified that, on the night of the incident,
 Paul said “many times” that “he going kill him” referring to
 Charles. However, Debbie admitted that she did not tell the
 police this information or include it in her written statement. 
The jury would also have had a rational basis for
 
believing that Paul was trying to protect Debbie by warning or
 punishing Charles. Paul testified multiple times that he
 believed that Charles was physically abusing Debbie. He
 testified that he was not jealous and the attack was “like trying
 
41
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to keep her safe, protect -- protecting her.” Paul testified
 
that he “never like . . . something happen to her” “[b]ecause
 [Charles] was hurting Debbie.” 
The jury’s verdict in this case also indicates that the
 
jury believed Paul did not intentionally or knowingly cause
 Charles’ death. The jury convicted Paul of the included offense
 of reckless manslaughter, which rejects the conclusion that Paul
 intentionally or knowingly caused Charles’ death. See HRS § 707­
702(1)(a) (Supp. 2006). 
The court made its decision not to instruct the jury on
 
assault based on its analysis of the law as interpreted though
 Robinson and Alston, not upon facts adduced at trial. The
 prosecution also argued against the inclusion of the assault
 charges based on an interpretation of law and not on the factual
 circumstances of the case.
 
The totality of the evidence showed a rational basis
 
for acquitting Paul of murder in the second degree and convicting
 him of assault in the first degree. Because assault in the first
 degree is a lesser included offense of murder in the second
 degree, Paul was entitled to a jury instruction on assault in the
 first degree. The court’s failure to give this instruction was
 
42
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Flores, 131 Hawai' i at __ 
, 314 P.3d at 134.20
 
Thus, the ICA erred in affirming the court’s judgment
 
because the court erred in failing to instruct the jury on the
 
included offense of assault in the first degree.
 
D.
 
The dissent contends that under the facts of this case
 
that the jury “could not have” found that Paul committed assault
 
in the first degree “without also finding that [Paul] consciously
 disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct
 would cause [Charles’] death.” Dissenting Opinion at 6. In
 other words, the dissent is contending that the same evidence
 that would have permitted the jury to convict [Paul] of first
 degree assault would have also required the jury to convict him
 of reckless manslaughter. Id. at 6, 9.
 
This contention is incorrect both as a matter of law
 
and of fact. First, as a matter of law, a jury’s determination
 of intentionally or knowingly causing serious bodily injury does
 not provide any inference that the jury would have concluded that
 the defendant consciously disregarded a risk that the defendant’s
 
20
 As noted by Paul in his Application, the court interrupted Defense
Counsel “during closing arguments when counsel was arguing to the jury that if
they believed the instant matter was an assault case, then they should find
Paul not guilty.” The court interrupted to say that “Assault is not to be –
assault is not a consideration.” Denying defense counsel the ability to make
this very argument highlights the harmful error caused by a failure to
properly instruct the jury.
 
43
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conduct would result in the injured person’s death, much less
 
that the manslaughter offense was required to have been proved
 for the jury to return an assault in the first degree verdict. 
Second, as a matter of the facts adduced at trial, the
 
contention that a finding of assault in the first degree in this
 case would require a jury to convict Paul of manslaughter is not
 correct. 
Paul testified that at the time he was assaulting
 
Charles he did not aim for Charles’ head or for any particular
 part of Charles’ body. In view of Paul’s testimony, it was for
 the jury to judge the credibility of his statements and to assess
 Paul’s actions before, during, and after the incident in light of
 all the other evidence to determine Paul’s state of mind during
 the incident. 
Nevertheless, the dissent maintains that the jury was
 
required to find that Paul consciously disregarded the risk that
 the jabbing would cause Charles’ death. As stated, however, Paul
 testified that he was not aiming for any particular part of
 Charles’ body, and it appeared that Charles was trying to fend
 off the jabs and suffered “defensive injuries” but no skull
 fractures according to Dr. Suzuki. Paul never testified that he
 consciously disregarded the risk that his conduct would cause
 Charles’ death, and in fact, his testimony essentially rejected
 
44
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
such a contention as he indicated “At that time I wasn’t
 
thinking. My mind was just - -.”
 
Thus, it is the duty of a jury, and not an appellate
 
court, to weigh such evidence; it would be contrary to
 fundamental principles of our jury system to hold, as the dissent
 urges, that as a matter of law the jury “could not have” found
 assault in the first degree “without also finding” that Paul
 consciously disregarded the risk that the jabbing would cause
 Charles’ death.
 
It bears repeating that the jury in this case evaluated
 
Paul’s intent during the incident and, based upon its
 consideration of all the evidence, concluded that the government
 had not proved that Paul intended to cause Charles’ death or that
 Paul was aware that his conduct was practically certain to have
 that result. Thus, it would appear that the jury did give some
 weight to Paul’s testimony regarding the events.
 
However, because the jury was not permitted to consider
 
assault in the first degree, the jury was compelled to either
 acquit Paul entirely or convict him of manslaughter. Since Paul
 had acknowledged that he had tried to hurt Charles for what
 Charles had done to Debbie and because the jury did not have an 
included offense alternative, the jury had little choice but to
 return a verdict of manslaughter. Keeble v. United States, 412
 
U.S. 205, 212-13 (1993) (requiring instruction on lesser-included
 
45
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
offenses protects defendant from the danger that “[w]here one of
 
the elements of the offense charged remains in doubt, but the
 defendant is plainly guilty of some offense, the jury is likely
 to resolve its doubt in favor of conviction”). 
Unequivocally, this is not a case where the evidence
 
requires a verdict of manslaughter where Paul’s state of mind
 “remains in doubt.” Id. Under the facts of this case, a jury
 
may or may not determine that Paul “consciously disregarded” the
 risk that his conduct would cause Charles’ death. But that
 decision is for a jury, and not for this court as a matter of
 law, as the dissent contends.
21
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s and the circuit
 
court’s judgments are vacated and this case is remanded to the
 circuit court for a new trial.
 
Randall K. Hironaka 
for petitioner
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
Stephen K. Tsushima
for respondent 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
 
21
 In light of our determination that there was a rational basis in
the evidence for the jury to acquit Paul of manslaughter and convict him of
assault in the first degree, we do not address the dissent’s reading of the
term “charged offense” in HRS § 701-109(5). 
46
 