***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
YOKO KATO, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-15-0000329  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-15-0000329 ; CR. NO. 13-1- 1641) 
 
JUNE 18, 2020 
  
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH NAKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  The circuit court in this case precluded the defendant 
from presenting third- party culpability evidence because it 
determined that the proffered evidence failed to establish a 
“legitimate tendency” that the third party committed the crime.  
In this opinion, we reexami
ne the “legitimate tendency ” test in 
light of the Hawai ʻi Rules of Evid
ence (HRE) and subsequent 
decisions of jurisdictions whose decisions were considered when Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-15-0000329
18-JUN-2020
02:10 PM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 (continued . . .)  
 this court adopted the test.  W e conclude from our review that 
admissibility of third- party culpability evidence is properly 
governed by HRE Rules 401  and 403, without having t o also 
satisfy a legitimate tendency test.  We additionally conclude 
that the circuit court erred by excluding the defendant from 
presenting third-party culpability evidence at trial, evidence 
that was fundamentally important to the defendant receiving a 
fair trial in this case.  Inasmuch as t he defendant’s right to 
present her defense was  prejudicially affected by the circuit 
court’s error, the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  We also address other contentions raised by the 
defendant as certain of these issues may arise on remand.   
  Accordingly, we vacate the conviction in this case,  
and the case is remanded to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
I. BACKGROUND AND  CIRCUIT COURT PROCEEDINGS 
  
Yoko Kato was arrested in connection with a stabbing 
that occurred on October 25, 2013,  in the Diamond Head area of 
Honolulu, on the island of O ʻahu.  She 
was subsequently charged
by complaint in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
court) with attempted murder in the second degree  in violation 
of Hawaiʻi1 Revised S tatutes (HRS) §§ 705-500, 707-701.5,  and  
 
                                                           
 1 HRS § 707 -701.5 (1993) provides in pertinent part as follows:  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 
 706-656.  Kato pleaded not guilty to the charge and a jury trial 
was held.2   
A. State’s Case at Trial 
1. Complaining Witness  
  T he complaining witness (CW) , a Japanese national, 
testified through a Japanese-English interpreter as follows.   
  In the fall of 2013 , she was living in Hawaiʻi to study 
English.  During this time, she met and began a romantic 
relationship with David Miller, a Caucasian 
janitor at the 
Shinnyo-en Temple that she attended.  Because she did not have a 
permanent residence, she moved in with Miller for about a month 
in August 2013, and
 Miller arranged for her to stay with his ex-
girlfriend Yoko Kato, a Japanese national
, from October 12 
through 13, 2013.  While staying with Kato, Kato spoke to the CW 
about her past relationship with Miller.
  After staying at  
Kato’s house, the CW had no contact or very limited contact with 
Miller and broke up with him.
   
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
 
(1) Except as provided in section 707 -701, a person commits 
the offense of murder in the second degree if the person 
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another 
person. 
 
 2 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over the proceedings in 
this case. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 
   W hile in Hawai ʻi,
 the CW used the LINE application 
(LINE app), an internet application frequently used by Japanese 
nationals, to communicate with friends and organize outings.  T o 
contact someone on the LINE app, users either put their LINE 
identifications (LINE ID)  directly into another user’s LINE app  
or users must know the LINE ID of the other user they want to 
contact.  Although the CW never gave Kato her LINE ID, Kato 
contacted her on the LINE app to request that she return a key 
that belonged to Miller’ s bicycle.   
 
 Shortly after moving out of Kato’s apartment , the CW 
received a LINE message from an Ai Akanishi asking her to meet 
and have drinks .  The CW did not know Akanishi , who claimed to 
have gotten the CW’s LINE ID from “other people.”   Despite 
feeling that the situation was odd, she agreed to have drinks 
with Akanishi and Akanishi’s boyfriend  because Akanishi said  
that she was a Japanese student studying English like the CW.  
The CW agreed to meet Akanishi for drinks at Akanishi’s 
boyfriend’s house on October 25, 2013 , on Kaunaoa Street.   
  O n that day , the CW biked to Kaunaoa Street to meet 
Akanishi and arrived at around 9:45 p. m.  A man was sitting down 
on a bench when she arrived, and he directed her, in poor 
Japanese, to a dark corner where she could park her bicycle.  
The man was wearing a 
short sleeved shirt, pants, and a baseball 
hat, had brown colored arms and neck, and appeared to be Asian.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 
 When he asked her name,  his Japanese did not sound good; 
according to the CW, it was “Japanese spoken by a nonnative 
speaker.”   
  While the CW was walking her bike to  the dark corner,  
the man stabbed her multiple times in the arm, back, and abdomen 
with a knife.  She screamed and began running away with the man 
chasing her.  The CW ran into the Diamondhead Coffee Bean and 
Tea Leaf shop, and the employees called the Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD).  She was taken to the hospital, where she 
spoke to HPD Officer Gilbert Trevino in Japanese.  The CW 
described the clothing that the assailant was wearing, and she 
told the officer the height of her attacker in 
centimeters, 
which he converted to 5 ’9”.  
  In an interview with Detective (Det.) Nakama on 
October 27, 2013, she described the person who stabbed her as a 
male.  The next day, she told Det. Nakama that the assailant 
could have been a woman, and that the voice was high for a male.   
  
In describing her injuries, the CW stated that she 
could no longer use her arm fully and still had scars from the 
knife wounds and post- stabbing surgeries.3  The CW testified that 
she did not believe that Miller was the individual who stabbed 
                                                           
3 Dr. David Inouye, an expert in surgery and surgery critical care, 
testified that he operated on the CW’s wounds, that they were caused by a 
knife, and that the wounds were life threatening.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 
 her because he spoke good Japanese, he did not have a motive, 
and he did not fit the physical shape of the person who stabbed 
her.  The CW also testified that Kato was not the person who 
stabbed her. 
2. Other Witnesses 
  Emiko Morie, a woman who lived on Kaunaoa Street, 
testified through a Japanese-English interpreter that she 
observed the CW arrive and begin speaking to an individual that 
Morie believed was a man.
  Morie stated that she saw the man 
chase after the CW and fall.  When she went to investigate, 
Morie testified, she discovered a flip phone where the man had 
fallen.  Morie explained 
that she opened the phone and saw that 
a call had recently been made to a contact named “David.”  She 
stated that she called that contact, and a man answered and 
offered to retrieve
 the phone within thirty minutes.  Morie said 
that a middle -aged Japanese woman, whom she later identified as 
Kato, approached her twenty minutes later and asked for the 
phone, but she refused to give it to the woman .   
  Eli Mosher, who was talking with his friend seated 
outside of his church when the incident occurred, testified that 
he saw the CW being chased by a man who fell down.  He stated 
that the man was about 5’6” to 5’8” with medium build .  Mosher 
testified that he also described the person as a male in a 
written statement that he gave to police on the even ing of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7 
 incident and when he was interviewed by Detective Nakama two 
days later.   Mosher also said  that the person  could “possibly” 
have been a woman , although he acknowledged that he was making 
that statement for the very first time at trial . 
  HPD Officer Jonathan Lo cey related that h e responded 
to the scene and interviewed the CW.  He explained that because 
the CW could not speak Japanese,  he was only able to communicate 
with her through hand signals and English.  The officer 
testified that,  based on the CW’s statements, the suspected 
assailant was a Caucasian male, wearing a white or gray T- shirt, 
jeans, and a black baseball cap.  The CW never told him that the 
attacker was Asian, Officer Locey stated.   
  HPD Officer William Ellis testified  that he was  
investigating  the scene of the incident when he was given a flip 
phone by Morie, who told him that she found the phone in the 
general area of the crime scene.   Officer Ellis said that he was 
then approached by a woman who identified herself as “Yuri 
Mochizuki”  and claimed that she lost her phone.   The woman was 
able to describe and unlock the phone, so he gave it to her, the 
officer stated.  The woman did not explain to him how she lost 
the phone, Officer Ellis testified, and he was unaware that the 
phone was connected to the incident.  After giving her the 
phone, she went into a gas station to use the restroom and did ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 
 not return although she had been requested to do so, the officer 
stated.4   
  Yui Mochizuki, Kato’s roommate at the time of the 
incident, testified 
through a Japanese-English interpreter that 
she saw Kato’s ex-boyfriend Miller at the apartment drinking 
beer with Kato at about 7:30 p.m.  on October 25, 2013.  
Mochizuki explained that she left for a party about that time 
and got home around 1:30 a.m.; Kato was home and told her that 
she had lost her phone that night.  Kato said that she had found 
an envelope at the door earlier that night containing $ 60 and a 
note written in Japanese with directions on where to find her 
phone, Mochizuki testified.  Kato stated that she had followed 
the instructions, which said to go to the Coffee Bean and Tea 
Leaf shop in the Diamond Head area at 9:00 p.m., Mochizuki 
testified, but when she got there , someone pushed her, causing 
her phone to f all.  After being pushed, Kato said she heard a 
scream and saw police officers in the area, Mochizuk i stated.  
Mochizuki testified that Kato told her that she believed Miller 
wrote the note, which contained the words “I love you,”  but Kato 
was unsure because the Japanese in the letter was better than 
                                                           
 4 Christopher Lam, a worker at that gas station, testified that  
Kato came in to use the bathroom around 11:00 p.m.  He told Kato that they 
did not have a public bathroom and she left, Lam stated.  Kato was wearing a 
red shirt and red shorts, Lam testified, and she did not have a knife or 
blood on her.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 
 Miller’s abilities.  Mochizuki explained that she had heard 
Miller speak Japanese poorly, using only words and not complete 
sentences.  Mochizuki testified that she never saw Kato with a 
knife and did not see any injuries on her on October 25 or 26, 
2013.   
  HPD Det. Roy Nakama, the officer assigned to 
investigate the case, testified that he reviewed all the reports 
associated with the case and that based on the information 
therein, he believed that the suspect was possibly  male, slim 
build, wearing dark clothes,  and approximately 5’5” to 5’9” in 
height.  The detective related  that, during the CW ’s interview, 
the CW, when describing the  assailant, stated that “on second 
thought it could have been a femal e,” “possibly a male or a 
female,” and that Kato might have done this to her.  The police 
thereafter searched Kato’s apartment and found her flip phone  
and an iPod Touch but did not recover any weapons or clothing.   
When Kato was arrested,  Det. Nakama related,  she had a bandage 
over her right knee and bruises on her left knee.  Det. Nakama 
also testified that he interviewed Miller, but that he did not 
consider Miller to be a suspect, did not check Miller for 
physical injuries, and did not request his cell phone.   
  Kristen Hamamo to, a digital forensics examiner, 
testified that she found LINE app communications between the CW 
and Akanishi,  and between the CW and Kato,  on the CW’s phone, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 
 but she could not determine what device the Akanishi messages 
came from.  The examiner explained that she found photos of 
texts from “David” on Kato’s iPhone .  Hamamoto testified that 
she also found that Kato’s iPod either sent or received 
communications with an email address connected to Akanishi, but 
she was unable to date those messages.5 
  Richard Sakurai, Anthony Loui, and Hien Ung, 
who were  
employed at a security equipment store during  October 2013, 
testified that a woman, whom Sakurai and Ung identified as Kato, 
came into the store in October and was interested in knives.  
Ung stated that Kato purchased a knife from the store; Sakurai 
and Loui testified that they could not confirm a purchase.   
B. Defense’s Case at Trial  
  Kato called David Miller as a witness.  Although all 
of Miller’s testimony was later stricken, as explained below, 
Miller testified that he met the CW in March or April 2013.  
Initially they were just friends but it developed into something 
more serious, Miller said.  Miller testified that in August 
2013, the CW had become his girlfriend and moved into his 
apartment.  She had to move out on September 1, 2013, Miller 
                                                           
 5 The CW testified that she had not received any messages from 
Akanishi since the incident.  Reyn Yoshinaga, a special agent with Homeland 
Security, testified that no one with the name Ai Akanishi entered the U.S. 
starting from the late 1990s.  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 
 explained, and their relationship lasted until about mid- October 
2013.  The defense asked Miller if he was aware the CW was 
dating other men while he was dating her;  the State objected  as 
to relevance and its objection was sustained.  The State 
similarly objected to the defense’s next question, asking Miller 
if he had seen the CW with other men
, and again  the objection 
was sustained on relevancy grounds.  Defense counsel requested a 
bench conference to explain the relevance of his line of 
questioning. 
  In the  bench conference, defense counsel explained 
that the defense was attempting to show that Kato did not have a 
motive to stab the CW whereas Miller did.  Counsel  argued that 
Miller wanted to marry the CW and thus was angry and upset with 
the CW for dating other men and leaving him, which resulted in 
his stabbing her.  The State responded that Kato could not bring 
up evidence of Miller’s motive under State v. Rabellizsa, 79 
Hawaiʻi 347, 903 P.2d 43 (1995).  Counsel maintained  that there 
was a sufficient nexus under Rabel lizsa because Miller was angry 
and upset at the CW; the CW was saying that she loved Miller, 
missed him, and wanted to see him,  and “then she just blo ws him 
off.”  And not only was Miller upset, c ounsel explained, but he 
went through the CW’s phone , and he “saw these males’ names .”  
The court asked defense counsel if Miller “said I’m going to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 
 kill [the CW]” and when counsel said that he had not, the court 
stated “Rabellizsa , no nexus.”   
  Following the bench conference, the defense attempted 
to ask Miller if he had seen the CW with other men, prompting 
Miller to request a break and the court to excuse the jury and 
begin another  bench conference.   The court returned to the 
Rabellizsa  issue.  The court evaluated some of the evidence to 
determine if there was a nexus , noting that “nobody saw [Miller] 
near the scene,” and “nobody says it was a Caucasian .”  Defense 
counsel responded that the CW had identified her assailant as a 
Caucasian to two different police officers.   The court replied, 
“but there’s testimony that it’s an Asian person.”  The court 
then stated that Miller was 5’10” while testimony indicated that 
the person who assaulted the CW was 5’5” to 5’7”.   Defense 
counsel stated that Miller’s build was similar to the person who 
stabbed the CW,  and that the estimates of the witnesses varied 
from perception of height.   The court also stated that Miller 
testified that he was not bothered now that the CW was going out 
with other men.  Defense counsel again noted that Miller went 
through the CW’s cell phone and saw numerous phone numbers of 
males and was unhappy about her relationships with other men.  
Additionally, c ounsel stated,  on October 23, 2013, Miller told 
Kato that the CW was having sex with other men.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 
 Having “heard the evidence,” t he court held that the 
defense “had to have some nexus between the other guy and the 
crime,” and that the court did n’t “see any here.”   The court 
then turned to Fifth Amendment issues with regard to Miller’s 
testimony.   
  
Prior to trial, Kato  had filed a notice of intent 
(Kato’s Motion in Limine #1) to introduce evidence that Miller 
had physically abused Kato in 
May 2013, that Miller had been 
arrested on June 24, 2013, for abuse of a family or household 
member based on a 
different incident with Kato,6 and that Miller 
had subsequently forced Kato to write a letter recanting her 
abuse allegations.
  Counsel explained that the defense would 
elicit testimony that in September 2013, Miller had told Kato 
that she ruined his life and that Miller had threatened to get 
revenge on her for having him arrested for the abuse offense.  
The defense’s theory was that David Miller set Kato up and was 
the person who stabbed Kato or arranged it, defense counsel 
explained to the court.    
                                                           
 6 Miller was subsequently prosecuted for harassment, but the case 
was dismissed without prejudice because of the prosecution’s failure to 
secure a Japanese interpreter for Kato and for not providing the defense with 
a 911 tape relating to the offense.   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 
   During a pretrial Hawai ʻi Rules of
 Evidence (HRE ) Rule 
104 hearing,7 Kato had called Miller to ask him questions 
regarding (1) the evidence proffered in her Motion in Limine #1, 
(2) questions relating to his relationships with Kato and the 
CW, (3) questions relating to his Japanese proficiency, and (4) 
questions relating to his motive to want to stab the CW.  Before 
Miller testified, the defense argued that Miller should not be 
allowed to take the Fifth Amendment on those questions because, 
under State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai ʻi 307, 909 P.2d 1122  (1996), the 
chance of his prosecution for harassment, violations of a 
temporary restraining order (TRO),8 or the CW’s stabbing was 
“slim to none.”  The court did not issue a ruling , and Miller 
was called to testify.   
  
Miller, with the assistance of court- appointed Fifth 
Amendment counsel, exercised his Fifth Amendment rights in 
response to defense counsel’s  questions as to multiple matters .  
The court ruled that Miller had properly asserted his Fifth 
                                                           
 7 HRE Rule 104(a) (1993) provides, in relevant part:  
 
Preliminary questions concerning the qualification of a 
person to be a witness, the existence of a privilege, or 
the admissibility of evidence shall be determined by the 
court, subject to the provisions of subsection (b).  In  
making its determination the court is not bound by the 
rules of evidence except those with respect to privileges.  
 
8 A TRO had been issued against Miller, effective June 26, 2013 , to 
December 25, 2013, that prohibited any contact between Miller and Kato, 
including texts, contact, and phone conversations.  It was later amended to 
allow them to be at the temple at the same time.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 
 Amendment privilege on questions regarding (1) June 24, 2013, 
the date of his arrest for abuse of family or household member; 
(2) any contact between himself  and Kato from June 26, 2013,  to 
December 23, 2013, as that could expose him to liability for 
violating the TRO; (3) and questions regarding his conversations 
with the CW that involved Kato.  At this hearing, Miller 
answered questions relating to his feelings towards the CW 
before and after their relationship ended,9 his feelings about 
the CW dating other men,10 and the CW’s two -day stay with Kato.11  
Miller also testified that he carries a “quick release” knife 
with a four-inch blade for work.   
  But a t trial, after Kato attempted to ask Miller if he 
had seen the CW with other men, Miller’s court -appointed Fifth 
Amendment lawyer12 informed the court that counsel would be 
instructing Miller, for the first time, to exercise his Fifth 
                                                           
 9 Specifically, Miller testified that he fell in love with the CW 
and hoped to marry her, although he never communicated this to the CW.  
Miller also testified that the CW told him that she loved him and would see 
him soon, before she stopped contacting him.  Miller explained that he was 
not angry at the CW for ending their relationship. 
 
 10 Miller said that he wasn’t sure if the CW was seeing other men 
but that he never saw her with other men.  Miller also explained that he was 
not upset about the CW dating men before him.   
 
 11 Miller stated that he told the CW not to tell Kato that he and 
the CW were in a relationship.  Miller also explained that the CW told him 
that she never told Kato she was in a relationship with Miller.   
 
 12 Miller’s court -appointed counsel at the pretrial hearing and at 
trial was the Office of the Public Defender, although different attorneys 
appeared on his behalf at the two proceedings.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 
 Amendment rights to any questions that would “arguably give 
[Miller] a motive to assault [the CW].”  The court then held 
another HRE Rule 104 hearing during a trial recess because of 
Miller’s intention to exercise the Fifth Amendment to questions 
he had answered at the pretrial H RE Rule 104 hearing.  Kato 
argued that Miller should be forced to testify because he had 
already answered these questions with counsel present and 
because, under Kupihea,  the chance of Miller’s prosecution for 
the stabbing of the CW  was remote.   
  At the trial HRE Rule 104 hearing, the court overruled 
Kato’s objections  and allowed Miller to  invoke the Fifth 
Amendment on (1) “motive related questions” because Kato was 
trying to blame Miller for the crime, (2) communications he had 
with Kato because “it’s going to lead directly to [Miller] fixed 
[the stabbing] up, allegedly,” and (3) communications with the 
CW after she moved out because it would “infer that he had 
communications with [the CW] up to the 24th ” of October, which 
could furnish a link.   The court further permitted Miller to 
exercise his Fifth Amendment rights on questions he had 
previously answered, including questions relating to his 
feelings towards the CW before and after their relationship 
ended, Miller’s  feelings  about the CW dating other m en, the CW’s 
two-day stay with Kato, and whether he owned a knife.  The court 
explained its ruling by noting that Kato was trying to blame ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 
 Miller for the stabbing, and thus any questions about his motive 
could implicate him.  The court did not rule on defe nse’s 
contention that Miller had waived his Fifth Amendment privilege 
by answering those questions at the pretrial Rule 104 hearing 
with appointed counsel present , instead remarking, “when there’s 
a change of lawyer, are you stuck with your old assertions of 
the Fifth, or are you not? 
 I don’t know.”   
  In light of the court’s ruling, defense counsel
 argued 
that much of the information that would be excluded by Miller 
asserting his Fifth Amendment privileges could not come out 
through Kato’s testimony because it would be excluded as hearsay 
statements.13  Kato’s right to a fair trial would be violated 
unless Miller was considered unavailable so that his statements 
could come in under HRE Rule 804, defense counsel maintained.  
The court reaffirmed its rulings on Miller’s Fifth Amendment 
privileges but does not appear to have ruled on Kato’s argument 
that eliciting the evidence through Kato would not be viable .  
  
After the court’s rulings to essentially preclude all 
testimony from Miller related to the incident, his prior 
relations with Kato, and his relationship with the CW, the court 
convened the jury , and struck all of Miller’s trial testimony  
                                                           
 13 Kato originally informed the court that she would testify.  The 
court, in rendering its ruling allowing Miller to exercise the Fifth 
Amendment, stated its assumption that Kato would be able to testify as to 
what Miller had told her.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 
 with Kato’s consent .14  Kato exercised her right to remain silent 
and did not testify; according to defense counsel, Kato made 
this decision because of t he court rulings regarding Miller’s 
exercise of his Fifth Amendment rights.    
B. Jury Instructions and Verdict  
  During the settling of jury instructions, the court 
ruled that, under Rabellizsa , Kato could not argue that Miller 
stabbed the CW, but Kato could argue that someone besides her 
was the person who stabbed the CW
.  The court explained that 
there was nothing tying Miller to the scene nor did Miller match 
the physical description of the assailant provided by witnesses.  
In her closing argument, Kato referenced the fact that the CW 
and witnesses identified a male suspect, but, complying with the 
court’s ruling, Kato 
did not argue that it was Miller.   
  The court instructed the jury on the included offenses 
of attempted murder in the s econd degree, including reckless 
endangering in the s econd degree.  The jury was not instructed 
on accomplice liability nor did the parties raise an accomplice 
liability theory in their closing arguments.15   
                                                           
 14 At the close of the State’s case, Kato moved for a judgment of 
acquittal; that motion was denied.  
 15 During the discussion on the defense motion for judgment of 
acquittal, the court aske d if accomplice liability was “involved here.”  The 
State responded that “it could be” and defense counsel answered “I mean, 
theoretically.  But even that is a stretch. . . .  So either [Kato’s] the 
stabber, or she’s not.  She’s an accomplice, or not.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 
   During jury deliberations, the jury asked the court if 
it could “consider whether someone else a ided [Kato]?”  In 
response, the court told the jury , “During this tri al, you 
received all of the evidence which you may consider to decide 
this case.  You must follow all of the court’s instructions to 
you.”  The jury communicated with the court again, stating, 
After deliberating yesterday afternoon and all morning, we 
are still hung almost 50/50.  
 One major point of confusion 
is how we interpret the legalese of the charge itself on 
page 23 of our instruction [for attempted murder in the 
second degree].  Some of us feel that [Kato] is not guilty 
because there is reasonable doubt whether [Kato] actually 
held the knife and stabbed [the CW].  Others feel that 
there is proof beyond a reasonable doubt that [Kato] took 
actions to lead [the CW] to Kaunaoa St. where someone was 
waiting to stab [the CW].  
 
Our question is, in layman’s terms, does the charge include 
[Kato] intentionally conspiring to have [the CW] stabbed 
without actually being the stabber?  
 
In response to the jury’s second question, the court responded 
“No.”   
  
The jury found Kato guilty of reckless endangering in 
the second degree.16  Kato was sentenced to one year 
incarceration with credit for time served, with the jail 
sentence stayed pending appeal.   Kato timely appealed from the 
circuit court’s March 11, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (judgment) to the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA).   
                                                           
 16 HRS § 707 -714(1)(a) (Supp. 2012) provides as follows:  “A person 
commits the offense of reckless endangering in the second degree if the 
person . . . [e]ngages in conduct that recklessly places another person in 
danger of death or serious bodily injury[.] ” 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 
 II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  Kato raised the following four points of error on 
appeal: (1) the circuit court erred in instructing the jury on 
reckless enda ngering in the s econd degree as a lesser -included 
offense; (2) there was not substantial evidence for the jury to 
convict Kato for reckless e ndangering in the s econd degree; (3) 
the court abused its discretion in failing to compel Miller to 
testify over his assertion of his Fifth Amendment privileges; 
and (4) the court erred in precluding Kato from adducing 
evidence that Miller had a motive to commit the crime charged.   
  The State acknowledged in its answering brief that it 
failed to convince the jury beyond a reasonable doubt that Kato 
was the person who stabbed the CW.  The State,  while noting that 
the jury was not instructed on accomplice liability, asserted 
that it would have been improper to do so as the State did not 
present accomplice evidence.
  The State argued that a r eckless 
endangering in the second degree verdict does not require Kato 
to have been an accomplice;  it merely required the State to 
prove that Kato had placed the CW in danger of death or serious 
bodily injury.  As to Miller’s Fifth Amendment privileges, the 
State noted that it did not offer him immunity and therefore the 
risk of prosecution for violations of the TRO or the CW’s 
stabbing was not rem
ote under Kupihea.  Finally, the State 
argued that Kato failed to present any evidence linking Miller ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 
 to the stabbing of the CW and thus failed to show a legitimate 
tendency that Miller was the assailant.   
  
The ICA, in its memorandum o pinion,17 stated that the 
State pursued a theory that Kato was the person who stabbed the 
CW, but it determined that there was substantial evidence upon 
which the jury could have found Kato to be an accomplice.18  
Thus, the ICA concluded that it was not error for the circuit 
court to instruct on r eckless endangering in the s econd degree, 
and there was sufficient evidence to support Kato’s conviction 
on this offense.   
  Turning to the circuit court’s a llowance  of Miller’s 
assertion of his Fifth Amendment privilege, the ICA noted that 
the privilege applies to testimony at any proceeding if it might 
tend to show the witness committed a crime.  The ICA explained 
that Kato attempted to introduce evidence that would show that 
                                                           
 17 The ICA’s memorandum opinion can be found at State v. Kato, No. 
CAAP-15-0000329, 2019 WL 1253370 (App. Mar. 19, 2019) (mem.) . 
 
 18 The ICA ruling on this issue states as follows:  
 
In this case, there was substantial evidence upon which the 
jury could have concluded that Kato, pretending to be 
someone named “Ai Akanishi,” used the LINE application to 
lure [the CW] to the Kauna ʻoa Street address where someone - 
who may or may not have  been Kato  herself - was waiting 
there to stab her.  Jury Communication No. 2 bears this 
out, as does the extremely short time - twelve minutes - 
between the Circuit Court answering the jury’s question and 
the return of the verdict.   
(Emphasis added.) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 
 Miller violated a TRO, violation of which was still subject to 
prosecution at the time of the pretrial motions and trial, as 
well as evidence that could “furnish a link in the chain of 
evidence needed to prosecute him”  for the CW’s stabbing .  
Accordingly, the ICA held that the court did not abuse its 
discretion when it did not compel Miller to answer questions 
after he invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-
incrimination.   
  In evaluating whether the circuit court erred in 
precluding evidence of Miller’s motive to attack the CW, the ICA 
stated that, in order to introduce evidence that a third person 
committed the crime, there must be a nexus between the third 
person and the commission of the crime, motive evidence alone 
would be irrelevant and collateral. (Citing State v.  Rabellizsa, 
79 Hawaiʻ i 347, 349-50, 903 P.2d 43, 45- 46 (1995)).  The ICA 
recited certain evidence proffered, namely that the CW described 
her attacker as a non-native speaker of Japanese and a Caucasian 
male with a height between 5’4” to 5’8” tall, and weighed the 
evidence implicating Kato and  tending to show that Miller was 
not the stabber.  The ICA noted that there was no evidence 
connecting Miller to the LINE app or to messages sent by “Ai 
Akanishi,” nor was there evidence that Miller had access to 
Kato’s phone.  After evaluating the evidence, the ICA held that 
the evidence proffered did not have a legitimate tendency to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 
 show that Miller was the person who stabbe d CW or that he framed 
Kato for the attack.  Thus, the ICA held that the circuit court 
did not err in precluding Kato from eliciting evidence of 
Miller’s alleged motive to murder the CW, the ICA held.   
  
The ICA accordingly affirmed the judgment of the 
circuit court.  Kato timely filed an application for writ of 
certiorari, which this court accepted.   
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 The standard employed  when reviewing the admissibility 
of evidence varies with the particular evidentiary rule at 
issue.  State v. West, 95 Hawai ʻi 
452, 456, 24 P.3d 648, 652  
(2001) (citing Kealoha v. Cty. of Haw., 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 
P.2d 670, 676 (1993)).  When a rule is amenable to objective 
application such that it can result in only one correct answer 
in a given situation, the lower court ’s application of the rule 
is reviewed under the right/wrong standard.  Id .  The evaluation 
of whether evidence is “relevant ” within the meaning of HRE Rule 
401 (1993) falls into this category of determinations, and we 
are thus not required to give weight to the trial court ’s 
application of the rule.  State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawai ʻi 280, 
286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24 
 B. Sufficien cy of the Evidence 
 
 Appellate courts review the sufficiency of the 
evidence at trial for “substantial evidence.”  State v. Kalaola,
124 Hawai ʻi 43, 4
9, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010).  Substantial 
evidence in this context is defined as “credible evidence which 
is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.”  Id.  Evidence 
adduced in the trial court must be considered in the strongest 
light for the prosecution when the appellate court passes on the
legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction.  
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992).   
 
C. Fifth Amendment Privilege Against Self -Incrimination 
 
 “Whether a trial court should compel a witness to 
testify over the witness’s assertion that his answer might tend 
to incriminate him or her is a matter within the sound exercise 
of its discretion, and is thus reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion.”  State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai ʻi 307, 312
, 909 P.2d 
1122, 1127 (1996) (citation omitted). 
D. Jury Instructions 
  The propriety of jury instructions, or the ir omission , 
is a question of law reviewed de novo using the following 
standard: “[w] hether, when read and considered as a whole, the 
instructions given are prejudicially insufficient , erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading.”  State v. Bovee, 139 Hawa
iʻi 530, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 
 537, 394 P.3d 760, 767 (2017) (quoting State v. Frisbee, 114 
Hawaiʻi 76, 79, 156 P.3d 1182, 1185 (2007)); Kobashigawa v. 
Silva, 129 Hawaiʻ i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 (2013).   
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court Erred in Precluding the Defense f rom 
Adducing Third-Party Culpability Evidence that Miller Was the 
Person Who  Assaulted  the CW. 
  
Kato contends that there was sufficient evidence under 
State v. Rabellizsa, 79 Hawai ʻi 347, 903 P.2d 43 (1995)
, to show 
a legitimate tendency that Miller was the person who committed 
the stabbing, and thus the court erred in not allowing her to 
elicit testimony about Miller’s motive to assault the CW with a 
knife.   
  In Rabellizsa, this court considered as a matter of 
first impression the admissibility of “evidence of a third 
person’s motive to commit the crime for which the defendant was 
charged.”  79 Hawai ʻi at 350, 903 
P.2d at 46.  The Rabellizsa 
court, citing a series of cases from other jurisdictions, noted 
that generally motive alone is not sufficient to establish 
relevance; rather, there must be a “nexus between the proffered 
evidence and the charged crime.”  Id. (quoting  Winfield v. 
United States (Winfield I), 652 A.2d 608, 613 (D.C. 1994) 
(stating that evidence must “clearly link” a third party to the 
commission of the crime)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 
   T he court in Rabellizsa quoted from People v. Green, 
which held that, to be admissible, a third party’s motive to 
commit the crime “ must be coupled with substantial evidence 
tending to directly connect that person with the actual 
commission of the offense. ”
  Id. (quoting 609 P.2d 468, 480 
(Cal. 1980)).  This court stated that the California Supreme 
Court “[f]ollowing Green,” held in People v. Hall that “ there 
must be direct or circumstantial evidence linking the third 
person to the actual perpetration of the crime.”  Id. (emphasis
omitted) (quoting 718 P.2d 99, 104 (Cal. 1986)).    
  T he Rabellizsa court additionally cited State v. 
Denny, wherein  the Wisconsin Court of Appeals held that, for 
third-party culpability evidence to be admissible, “there must 
be a ‘legitimate tendency’ that the third person could have 
committed the crime. ”  Id. (quoting 357 N.W.2d 12, 17 (Wis. Ct. 
App. 1984) (requiring a defendant to show motive, opportunity, 
and “some evidence to directly connect a third person to the 
crime charged which is not remote in time, place or 
circumstances” for the evidence to  be admissible)).   
  In light of the authority that it had reviewed, the 
Rabellizsa court adopted Denny’s “legitimate tendency” test,  
stating that it “comports with the relevancy test set forth in 
HRE Rule 401.”  Id. at 351, 903 P.2d at 47.  Thus, while this 
court recognized the applicability of HRE Rule 401 to the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
27 admissibility of third-party culpability evidence, such evidence 
was additionally required to meet a “legitimate tendency ” test.  
Id.  Although the court in Rabellizsa did not specifically 
define the “legitimate tendency” test, our trial and appellate 
courts in applying the test have frequently required the 
defendant, when offering third- party culpability evidence, to 
meet varying standards, such as by showing “substanti al 
evidence” or “direct evidence” that the third party is “directly 
connected,” “clearly linked,”  or has a “nexus” to the commission 
of the charged offense. ”19  Here, the circuit court, as part of
its ruling on the admissibility of the third- party culpability 
evidence, stated that, “But I don ’t know if that ’s a nexus.  I 
mean nobody saw [Miller] near the scene” and that under 
“Rabellizsa, no nexus.”  
In the 25 years since Rabellizsa was decided, almost 
all of the decisions underlying our holding in Rabellizsa have 
been clarified or modified by subsequent caselaw in those 
19See, e.g., State v. Griffin, 126 Hawaiʻi 40, 54, 266 P.3d 448, 462
(App. 2011) (quoting Rabellizsa as holding that “ there must be a nexus 
between the proffered evidence and the charged crime” and that third -party 
motive “must be coupled with substantial ev idence tending to directly connect 
that person with the actual commission of the offense ”); State v. Peralto, 95
Hawaiʻi 1, 3 n.1, 18 P.3d 203, 205 n.1 (2001)  (holding there was no trial 
error relating to any alternative theory of the crime absent “evidence to 
directly connect [a third party] to the crime charged” that is not remote in 
time, place or circumstances (quoting Rabellizsa , 79 Hawaiʻ i at 350, 903 P.2d 
at 46))
; State v. Kato, No. CAAP- 15-0000329, 15 -17 (quoting Rabellizsa ’s 
recitation of the standard set forth in People v. Green).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
28 (continued . . .)  jurisdictions.  It is therefore appropriate to reassess our 
continuing application of the “legitimate tendency” test.  
Initially, it is noted that the Rabellizsa  court, in 
the beginning of its analysis, set forth the following: “As 
stated in People v. Green ” and then quote d its standard for the 
admission of third- party culpability evidence.  Rabellizsa, 79 
Hawai’i at 350, 903 P.2d at 46 (quoting Green , 609 P.2d at 480).  
Immediately after the quotation, the Rabellizsa  court stated : 
“Following Green, the California Supreme Court held that” and 
then quoted from People v. Hall .  Id. (quoting Hall, 718 P.2d at 
104).  However, the Hall court had  overruled the Green standard 
and held that it was “not to be followed.”  Hall, 718 P.2d at 
104 n.3.  The Rabellizsa court did not reference the overruling 
of Green, and although it did not adopt the test  set forth in 
Green, the passage quoted in the Rabellizsa decision has been 
followed or quoted in subsequent  Hawai ʻi cases that  have cited 
Rabellizsa.20  Further, the California Supreme Court in Hall , in 
20The quoted passage states as follows: 
It is settled . . . that evidence that a third person had a motive to 
commit the crime with which the defendant is charged is inadmissible if 
it simpl y affords a possible ground of suspicion against such person; 
rather, it must be coupled with substantial evidence tending to 
directly connect that person with the actual commission of the offense . 
. . .  The rule is designed to place reasonable limits on the trial of 
collateral issues . . . and to avoid undue prejudice to the People from 
unsupported jury speculation as to the guilt of other suspects . . . .  
Rabellizsa, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 350, 903 P.2d at 46 (emphasis added) (alterations in 
original) (quoting 
Green, 609 P.2d at 480).  The underlined clause was ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 
 articulating a requirement that a defendant present direct or 
circumstantial evidence linking the third person to the 
commission of the crime, stressed that  “courts should simply 
treat third-party culpability evidence like any other evidence: 
if relevant it is admissible (§ 350) unless its probative value 
is substantially outweighed by the risk of undue delay, 
prejudice, or confusion (§ 352).”  Id. at 104 (emphasis added).21  
  Rabellizsa also relied on Winfield I to establish that 
there “must be a nexus between the proffered evidence and the 
charged crime.”  Rabellizsa, 79 Hawai ʻi at 350, 903 P.2d at 46 
(internal quotations omitted) (quoting Winfield I , 652 A.2d at 
613).  But upon rehearing en banc in the same case, the D.C. 
Court of Appeals made clear that the test for relevance for 
third-party culpability evidence is the same test as for any 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
applied, for example, by the ICA in State v. Griffin  and nearly quoted in
full by the ICA in this case.  See supra note 19.     
 
 21 California Evidence Code (Cal. Evid. Code) § 350 (1967) provides 
that “No evidence is admissible except relevant evidence.”  
 
  Cal. Evid. Code § 210 (1967) states that “‘Relevant eviden ce’ 
means evidence, including evidence relevant to the credibility of a witness 
or hearsay declarant, having any tendency in reason to prove or disprove any 
disputed fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action.”  
 
  Cal. Evid. Code § 352 (1967) provides as follows: “The 
court in its discretion may exclude evidence if its probative value is 
substantially outweighed by the probability that its admission will (a) 
necessitate undue consumption of time or (b) create substantial danger 
of undue prejudice, of confusing the issues, or of misleading the 
jury.”   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 
 other crime, noting t hat it had “explicitly tied the relevance 
standard to the usual meaning of that concept.”  Winfield v. 
United States (Winfield II), 676 A.2d 1, 4 (D.C. 1996).  
Further, the court in Winfield II  concluded “that the phrase 
‘clearly linked’ is unhelpful and should be discarded from our 
lexicon of terms governing the admissibility of third
-party 
perpetrator evidence.”   Id. at 3.  The court explained that “[a] 
requirement that evidence ‘ tend to indicate some reasonable 
possibility that a person other than the defendant committed the 
charged offense’ sufficiently accommodates” the concern about 
distracting the jury from the issue of the defendant’s guilt.  
Id. at 5 (first emphasis added) (citations omitted).   
The court in Winfield II noted that a trial judge 
could exclude evidence of third- party motivation “unattended by 
proof that the party had the practical opportunity to commit the 
crime, including at least inferential knowledge of the victim’s 
whereabouts.”  Id.  However, the  court explained  that a 
defendant did not need to place the third- party at or near the 
murder scene at the relevant time given the “combined force of 
the proffered circumstances.”  Id. at 6; accord Johnson v. 
United States, 136 A.3d 74, 80 (D.C. 2016) (holding that 
“practical opportunity”  in the third- party culpability context 
did not require proof actually placing the third party at or 
near the crime scene).  The court also cautioned that “the trial ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 
 court must resolve close questions of admissibility in [third-
party culpability cases] in favor of inclusion, not exclusion,” 
because “[u]nduly restricting admission of third -party 
perpetrator evidence would raise concerns of unequal 
treatment.”22  Winfield II, 676 A.2d at 6- 7; accord Turner v. 
United States, 116 A.3d 894, 917 (D.C. 2015) (“ [C]lose questions 
of admissibility should be resolved in favor of inclusion, not 
exclusion.”).  
  T he “legitimate tendency ” analysis  applied by the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court in Denny has also been revisited by that 
court because “it does not provide complete clarity as to the 
meaning and contours of two of its prongs.”  State v. Wilson, 
864 N.W.2d 52, 64 (Wis. 2015).23  While the Wilson  court 
reaffirmed the use of the Denny  test in evaluating the 
admissibility of third- party culpability evidence, it also 
concluded that the “ambiguity” in the three prongs of the 
“legitimate tendency
” test is “understandable in light of the 
                                                           
 22 Justice Nakayama’s dissent ( dissent) states that the Winfield II 
court reaffirmed the holding of Beale v. United States, 465 A.2d 796, 803 
(D.C. 1983), cert. denied, 465 U.S. 1030 (1984), as it relates to third party 
culpability evidence.  Dissent at 28 n.26.  However, the Winfield II  court 
specifically stated, “To the extent our decisions in Brown [v. United States, 
409 A.2d 1093 (D.C. 1979)], Beale , and later cases, e.g., Watson v. United 
States, 612 A.2d 179, 182 (D.C. 1992), impose a more exacting standard of 
relevance [than FRE 401], we disavow them.”  Winfield II, 676 A.2d at 5.   
 23 The Denny  “legitimate tendency” test requires third -party 
culpability evidence to show three prongs: (1) motive, (2) opportunity, and 
(3) a direct connection to the crime.  Wilson, 864 N.W.2d at 64- 67.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32 
 multitude of fact situations in which the Denny  test may be 
employed.”  Id.  In addition to the Wilson  court’s 
clarifications to the  “legitimate tendency ” test, the Wisconsin 
Supreme Court has also curtailed its application in other 
contexts
: 
If we were to apply Denny’s legitimate tendency test to 
unknown, third -party evidence, the bright line test 
established in Denny would be rendered meaningless  . . . .  
[W]e hold that the test is not applicable to the 
introduction of allegedly similar crime evidence that is 
committed by an unknown third party.   
 
State v. Scheidell, 595 N.W.2d 661, 668 (Wis. 1999) (determining 
that the standard for admissibility of similar crime evidence 
would be governed by other crimes, wrongs, or acts evidence).  
The Scheidell court opined that a  defendant simply could not 
establish a plausible motive for an unknown defendant and thus 
would face “an insurmountable barrier to admissibility.”  Id. at 
668.  The Wisconsin Supreme Court further determined that the 
“legitimate tendency ” test would also not apply to “frame -up 
evidence, ” i.e., evidence that the defendant was being framed 
for the crime.  State v. Richardson, 563 N.W.2d 899, 903 (Wis. 
1997).  Finally, even prior to our holding in Rabellizsa, the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court had determined that proffered third-
party culpability evidence “must connect that person to the  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 
 crime, either directly or inferentially .”  Michael R.B. v. 
State, 499 N.W.2d 641, 646 (Wis. 1993) (emphasis added).24   
  The Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence “govern proceedings in 
the courts of the State of Hawaii.”  HRE Rule 101 ( 1993).  We 
have explained that “ the basic precondition for admissibility of 
all evidence is that it is relevant as that term is defined in 
HRE Rule 401.”  Medeiros v. Choy, 142 Hawai ʻi 233, 245, 418 P.3d 
574, 586 (2018) (quotations, alterations, and emphas is omitted) 
(citing Commentary to HRE Rule 402 (1980)).  HRE Rule 401 
defines “relevant evidence ” as “evidence having any tendency to 
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than 
it would be without the evidence.”   In Rabellizsa , this court 
stated that “we are persuaded that the ‘legitimate tendency’ 
test comports with the relevancy test set forth in HRE Rule 
401.”  79 Hawai ʻi at 351, 903 P.2d at 47.  However, requiring a 
defendant to satisfy a “legitimate tendency” test to admit 
                                                           
 24 The dissent asserts that Richardson  would not apply here because 
Kato was able to introduce, through Mochizuki’s testimony, evid ence of the 
note she argued Miller used to frame her.  Dissent at 30 n.27.  Kato’s 
defense was that Miller committed the crime and framed her by luring her to 
the crime scene by the note left at her door; however the circuit court 
precluded her from arguing this defense to the jury.  The dissent also argues 
that this opinion does not consider language from Michael R.B. that 
distinguishes “inferential” from “speculative connection.”  Dissent at 30 
n.27.  On the contrary, we simply note that Michael R.B. does not require a 
defendant to show a direct connection, but rather allows the defendant to 
present third- party culpability evidence that inferentially connects the 
third party to the crime.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 
 third-party culpability evidence exceeds the “any tendency” 
threshold of HRE Rule 401, and thus the test is not
 fully 
consistent with the Hawai ʻi Rules 
of Evidence.  
  Accordingly, we hold that the threshold for 
admissibility of third- party culpability evidence should be 
understood as applying the same relevancy test that is applied 
for all other evidence, whether it is offered by the State or by 
the defendant.  HRE Rule 401; accord Hall, 718 P.2d at 104 
(“[C]ourts should simply treat third-party culpability evidence 
like any other evidence: if relevant it is admissible [] unless 
its probative value is substantially
 outweighed by the risk of 
undue delay, prejudice, or confusion [].”); Winfield II, 676 
A.2d at 4 (noting that it had “explicitly tied the relevance 
standard to the usual meaning of that concept” for third -party 
culpability evidence); Gray  v. Commonwealth,  480 S.W.3d 253, 267 
(Ky. 2016) (“At its heart, the critical question for [a third -
party culpability theory of defense
] is one of relevance: 
whether the defendant’s proffered evidence has any tendency to 
make the existence of any consequential fact more or less 
probable.  And the best tool for assessing the admissibility of 
[third-party culpability] evidence is the Kentucky Rules of 
Evidence.”
 (footnote omitted)); State v. Gibson , 44 P.3d 1001, 
1004 (Ariz. 2002) (en banc) (“Rules 401, 402, and 403, Arizona 
Rules of Evidence, set forth the proper test for determining the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
35 
 admissibility of third- party culpability evidence.”); People v. 
Primo, 753 N.E.2d 164, 168 (N.Y. 2001) (“‘Clear link ’ and 
similar coinages, however, may be easily misread as suggesting 
that evidence of third- party culpability occupies a special or 
exotic category of proof.  The better approach, we hold, is to 
review the admissibility of third- party culpability evidence 
under the general balancing analysis that governs the 
admissibility of all evidence. ”); Tibbs v. State, 59 N.E.3d 
1005, 1011 (Ind. Ct. App. 2016) (“Evidence which tends to show 
that someone else committed the crime makes it less probable 
that the defendant committed the crime and is therefore relevant 
under [Evidence] Rule 401 ” (alteration in original) ).  
  Thus,  when a defendant seeks to introduce third-party 
culpability evidence, the defendant must initially clear no 
higher hurdle than that set by HRE Rule 401.25  The lack of a 
“direct” link  does not mean that the evidence is not relevant 
under HRE Rules 401.  A defendant need not place the third party 
at or near the scene of the crime; it is sufficient for 
                                                           
 25 To the extent that Rabellizsa and any other decision of this 
court or the ICA have held that defendants must show that the third -party is 
“directly connected to the commission of the charged offense” or that the 
third party has a “nexus” or “direct link” to the offense, such tests are  
superseded by this opinion.  See  Rabellizsa, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 350 -51, 903 P.2d at 
46-47; Peralto, 95 Hawai ʻi at 2 n.1, 18 P.3d at 204 n.1.  Likewise, we reject 
the formulation set forth in Griffin, 126 Hawai ʻi at 54, 266 P.3d at 462, that 
evidence of third-p arty motive “must be coupled with substantial evidence 
tending to directly connect that person with the actual commission of the 
offense,” as inconsistent with HRE Rule 401.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
36 
 relevancy considerations that the defendant has provided direct 
or circumstantial evidence  tending to show that the third person  
committed the crime.  See  HRE Rule 401.  Further, we agree with 
the Washington D.C. Court of Appeals that a trial court should 
resolve a close question of admissibility in favor of the 
defendant.  Winfield II, 676  A.2d at 6- 7.   
  In this case, significant evidence was presented that 
had a tendency to show that Miller was the person who committed 
the offense against the CW.  Three different witnesses, the CW, 
Morie, and Mosher testified that they saw a male either stab or 
chase the CW.  Officer Locey believed, based on the CW’s 
statements in the coffee shop, that he was looking for a 
Caucasian male.  At trial, the CW explained that her assailant 
spoke poor Japanese.  Kato proffered evidence that Miller was a 
Caucasian male, a non- native speaker of Japanese, and close in 
height to the person who did the stabbing as described by the 
CW.  The CW was stabbed with a knife; Kato showed that Miller 
carried a “quick release” knife for work, which indicates his 
access to and familiarity with knives.  Through Mochizuki’s 
testimony, Kato showed  that Mille r was together with Kato 
immediately before the offense.   Also through Mochizuki, Kato 
established her suspicions that Miller arranged to have her near 
the crime scene through the note she believed  he had written.   
From Morie’s testimony  it can be inferred that Miller was likely ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
37 
 the man called shortly after the CW was stabbed and that when he 
told Morie that he would retrieve the phone, Kato arrived 
instead.  This gives rise to a strong inference that Miller was 
in direct contact with Kato shortly after the CW was stabbed.   
  Additionally, based on Miller’s testimony at the 
pretrial Rule 104 hearing, Kato showed that Miller had 
previously dated the CW, wanted to marry her, and had not wanted 
to end his relationship with the CW.  Further, the defense 
proffered that Kato’s testimony would show Miller had gone 
through the CW’s phone and found text messages to other men and 
told Kato about this on October 23, 2013, that he informed Kato 
the CW was having sex with other men, and that  he was “angry and 
upset at [the CW].”  Miller’s testimony and the defense’s 
proffer underscored Miller’s anger toward CW and provided a 
motive for him to want to physically assault the CW.  Also, at 
the pretrial HRE Rule 104 hearing, defense counsel stated that 
Kato was prepared to testify that she believed Miller was 
setting her up in revenge for ruining his life by having him 
arrested for physically assaulting her.   
  Th e proffered evidence had a tendency, either directly 
or circumstantially, to implica te Miller as the person who ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
38 (continued . . .)  
 stabbed the CW.26  In fact, the evidence at trial alone so 
strongly indicated that Miller was the perpetrator of the 
stabbing that this course of events is manifested in 
the jury 
communications to the court, acknowledged by the State in its 
answering brief, recognized by the ICA in its memorandum 
opinion, and reflected in the jury’s verdict.27  Applying HRE 
Rule 401, there was ample evidence that had a tendency to show 
that Miller was the person who assaulted the CW, which 
indisputably was a fact of consequence to the determination of 
the action.  Further, the evidence adduced also readily 
satisfied the “legitimacy tendency” test applied by the circuit 
court and was improperly excluded on this basis.28   
                                                           
 26 The evidence also allows an inference that Kato and Miller were 
working in tandem, with Miller committing the stabbing and Kato aiding Miller 
in committing the offense.   
 
 27 As stated, the jury specifically asked the court whether it could 
“consider whether someone else aided [Kato],” and they were told in response 
to follow the court’s instructions.  The jury next informed the court that 
“there is reasonable doubt whether [Ka to] actually held the knife and stabbed 
[the CW]” and that “others feel that there is proof beyond a reasonable doubt 
that [Kato] took actions to lead [the CW] to Kaunaoa St. where someone was 
waiting to stab [the CW].”  The jury then asked “does the charg e include 
[Kato] intentionally conspiring to have [the CW] stabbed without actually 
being the stabber?”  The court responded “no” to the jury’s second question.   
  Also, as noted, the State acknowledged in its answering brief 
that it had “failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that [Kato] was the 
stabber and inflicted bodily injury upon [the CW].”  Likewise, the ICA noted 
that someone other than Kato might have been the CW’s assailant.  
 
 28 The dissent cites other evidence in the record that, in its view, 
refutes the relevancy of the third -party culpability evidence: for example, 
Miller said that he was not angry when the CW stopped contacting him, he 
never spoke to her about marriage, and he did not find out that the CW was 
seeing other men during or after their relationship.  Dissent at 35 n.33.  
But it is not the trial court’s responsibility in determining the relevancy 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
39 
   Once a defendant has cleared the threshold of HRE Rule 
401, the court must still evaluate whether the proffered 
evidence is “substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or 
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.”  HRE Rule 403 ( 1993).   
  In this case,  the probative value of the proffered 
evidence was indisputably not substantially outweighed by the 
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, misleading 
the jury, or by considerations of undue delay or waste of time.  
See HRE Rule 403.  The excluded evidence was of fundamental 
importance to the jury in its determination of the charge in 
this case and deprived Kato of a fair trial.  The circuit court 
erred in precluding Kato from introducing  third-party 
culpability evidence and in foreclosing defense counsel from 
arguing in closing argument that Miller assaulted the CW or 
framed Kato for the attack.  The error prejudicially affected 
                                                                              
(. . . continued) 
 
of evidence to weigh conflicting evidence, whether such evidence is in the 
form of testimony or an offer of proof.  Additionally, the dissent concludes 
that “Miller, at 5’10 ”, is much taller than the suspect.”  Dissent at 33.  
However, the CW on the night of the incident told Officer Trevino, who was 
Japanese speaking, the height of her attacker in centimeters, which the 
officer converted to 5’9”.  Further, Mosher testified that the suspect was 
5’6” to 5’8”.  Again, as further discussed in Part IV.B, infra, it is not the 
function of the trial court to resolve such factual disputes in determining 
the admissibility of third -party culpability evidence.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
40 
 Kato’s right to present her defense and to a fair trial, and it 
was clearly not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. 
DeLeon, 143 Hawaiʻ i 208, 218- 19, 426 P.3d 432, 442 -43 (2018) 
(holding trial court’s exclusion of specific instances of 
victims’ prior violent acts when there was actual dispute as to 
who was the first aggressor was not harmless error).29   
B. The Circuit Court and the ICA Improperly Weighed  the Third -
Party Culpability Evidence Proffered by Kato.   
  Both the circuit court and the ICA, in reaching the 
erroneous conclusion to exclude third- party culpability 
evidence, improperly weighed the evidence offered by the defense 
to support its admission.  During pre- trial hearings and at 
trial, Kato proffered evidence that Miller was a Caucasian male, 
a non-native speaker of Japanese, and was 5’10”.  Kato also 
elicited testimony from witnesses that the CW’s assailant was a 
Caucasian male, a non- native s peaker of Japanese, and around 
                                                           
 29 The dissent misapprehends the holding of this opinion, contending 
that our decision would allow “third -party motive evidence alone” to 
establish relevancy.  Dissent at 2, 26, 33.  Instead, our opinion applies HRE 
Rule 401’s relevancy standard to proffered third -party culpability evidence 
in the same manner as that rule applies to all other evidence.  It rejects 
the higher burden adopted in Rabellizsa, which is not consistent with the 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence.  Evaluating the admissibility of third -party 
culpability evidence under HRE Rules 401 and 403 is not a “flimsy standard,” 
as characterized by the dissent, dissent at 
32, as emphatically demonstrated 
by HRE Rules 401 and 403’s uniform a pplicability to all other forms of 
evidence and upon which our courts rely upon to provide fair and efficient 
trials.  Finally, the dissent maintains that it is disingenuous for this 
opinion to not cite other jurisdictions that have held third -party motive  is 
relevant only when there is additional evidence to connect the third person 
to the crime.  Dissent at 26 -27.  As stated, we do not hold that evidence of 
a third party’s motive on its own will ipso facto allow admissibility of such 
evidence, instead HRE  Rule 401 and Rule 403 govern.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
41 
 5’7” to 5’9” in height.  In explaining its ruling to deny the 
admission of the third- party culpability evidence, the circuit 
court stated that no one saw Miller at the scene, there was 
testimony that the assailant was Asian while Miller is 
Caucasian, Miller was not bothered by seeing the CW with other 
men, and Miller was around 5’10” tall.  Similarly, in affirming 
the circuit court’s ruling that Kato’s proffered evidence did 
not show that Miller committed the crime, the ICA stated that 
the CW would have recognized Miller’s voice if he was the 
assailant, Miller was not connected to the LINE app, no evidence 
showed that Miller had possession of Kato’s phone, and Kato gave 
an inconsistent story to her roommate about losing her phone.   
  In Holmes v. South Carolina, the United States Supreme 
Court considered an evidentiary rule adopted in South Carolina 
caselaw that excluded third- party culpability evidence “where 
there is strong evidence of [a defendant’s] guilt, especially 
where there is strong forensic evidence.”  547 U.S. 319, 32 9 
(2006) (alteration in original).  The Supreme Court noted that, 
under South Carolina’s rule, “if the prosecution’s case is 
strong enough, the evidence of third- party guilt is excluded 
even if that evidence, if viewed independently, would have great 
probative value[.]”  Id.  The Court observed that the logic of 
South Carolina’s rule required evaluating the State’s evidence, 
which cannot be done without making the type of factual findings ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
42 
 of credibility and reliability of the evidence, traditionally 
reserved for the trier of fact.  Id. at 330. 
Just because the prosecution’s evidence, if credited , would 
provide strong support for a guilty verdict, it does not 
follow that evidence of third -party guilt has on ly a weak 
logical connection to the central issues in the case.  
 
Id.  Without considering challenges to the reliability of the 
State’s evidence, the Supreme Court held that “no logical 
conclusion” could be reached regarding the strength of the 
defense’s evidence, nor could the State’s evidence be accurately 
assessed, especially when the State’s evidence ha d not been 
conceded.  Id.  at 331.  The Court hypothesized that an inverse 
rule, i.e., one requiring the State to show that its evidence 
against the defendant is not countered by evidence showing that 
the defendant is not guilty, would be equally illogical.  Id. at 
330. 
  The Holmes court concluded that basing the 
admissibility of a defendant’s third -party culpability evidence 
solely on the strength of the State’s evidence is “arbitrary,” 
and does not “rationally serve” the goal of third -party 
culpability rules.  Id . at 330-31.  Thus, the Supreme Court held 
that South Carolina’s rule violated a defendant’s right in a 
criminal case to have a “meaningful opportunity to present a 
complete defense.”  Id. at 331.   
  The very concern raised in Holmes , namely the ability 
of a defendant to introduce third -party culpability evidence on ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
43 
 its own merit, was present in this case.  Here, the circuit 
court and the ICA, when evaluating whether Kato’s proffered 
evidence and the evidence adduced during trial had a “legitimate 
tendency” to show that Miller wa s the person who assaulted the 
CW, both incorrectly weighed and relied on evidence tending to 
show that Miller was not the assailant.   
  The circuit court credited the State’s evidence 
showing that the assailant was female, Asian, and shorter than 
Miller.30  In so crediting the State’s evidence, the circuit 
court necessarily determined that Kato’s evidence showing that 
the assailant was male, white, around the same height as Miller, 
and spoke poor Japanese and was a nonnative speaker of Japanese 
was not credible.  The ICA similarly evaluated the State’s 
evidence, crediting Miller’s testimony that he had not used the 
LINE app and determining that Miller was not the CW’s assailant 
because the CW would have recognized him.  In so concluding, the 
ICA necessarily gave no weight to Kato’s proffered evidence that 
Miller had access to her phone and thus her LINE app, ignored 
the CW’s testimony that Kato was not the individual who stabbed 
her and that the assailant was not a native Japanese speaker, 
                                                           
 30 The circuit court also credited Miller’s testimony that he was 
not upset at the CW despite  (1) Miller’s testimony that he had wanted to 
marry the CW and that she just stopped contacting him without telling him 
that they were officially breaking up, and (2)  proffered defense evidence 
that Miller had found text messages to other men on the CW’s phone , Miller 
knew she was having sex with other men, and Miller was upset and angry at the 
CW. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
44 
 and rejected all the evidence from witnesses whose description 
of the assailant did not match Kato.  Because much of the 
State’s evidence was not conceded and by selectively crediting 
evidence, the circuit court and the ICA made determinations that 
should have been reserved to the jury for its consideration.  
Holmes, 547 U.S. at 330; see also  State v. Aplaca, 96 Hawai ʻi 17, 
25, 25 P.3d 792, 800 (2001) (holding that the circuit court 
erred by not submitting the question of the victim’s age and the 
defendant’s knowledge of the  victim’s age to the jury);  State v. 
Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637-38, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981) (per 
curiam) (“T he jury, as the trier of fact, is the sole judge of 
the credibility of witnesses or the weight of the evidence .”). 
  When a court excludes a defend ant’s third -party 
culpability evidence based solely on the weight of the State’s 
evidence tending to show that there was not a third- party 
perpetrator, its decision arbitrarily excludes such evidence and 
violates a defendant’s right to have a “meaningful opportunity 
to present a complete defense.”  Holmes, 547 U.S. at 331.  
Because the circuit court and the ICA impermissibly rejected 
Kato’s proffered evidence based on  the State’s contested 
evidence that Miller did not match the height, race, sex, and 
Japanese fluency of the assailant, each court erred in the 
manner that it evaluated the admissibility of the third- party 
culpability evidence.  The circuit court’s error i n excluding ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
45 
 the evidence prejudicially affected Kato’s right to a fair trial 
and was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  See  State v. 
Pulse, 83 Hawaiʻ i 229, 248, 925 P.2d 797, 816 (1996) (holding 
that the exclusion of competent testimony that infringed upon a 
constitutional right of the accused was presumptively 
prejudicial and was not harmless error).31  
C. The Circuit Court Utilized the Proper Standard and Did Not 
Abuse Its Discretion in Evaluating Miller’s Invocation s of His 
Fifth Amendment Privilege.  
  
Article I, section 10 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution, 
which is virtually identical to the Fifth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution,32 provides in pertinent part that “no 
person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a 
witness against one self” (Fifth Amendment privilege).  Haw. 
Const. art. I, § 10.  The Fifth Amendment privilege applies to 
any testimony an individual gives, whether at the person’s own 
                                                           
 31 The dissent argues that the circuit court and the ICA did not 
selectively credit the State’s evidence and that this opinion relies on 
defense counsel’s offer of proof instead of evidence in the record.  Dissent 
at 35 n.34.  The evidence was not in the evidentiary trial record because the 
circuit court excluded it after improperly weighing the State’s evidence 
against the defense’s proffer.  The requisite record for admission of the 
evidence was established in accordance with HRE Rule 103(a)(2) (Supp. 2012), 
which provides as follows: “In case the ruling is one excluding evidence, the 
substance of the evidence was made known to the court by offer or was 
apparent from the context within which questions were asked.”  Kato’s counsel 
stated to the circuit court the underlying bases for the admissibility of the 
third-party culpability evidence.  
 32 The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides in 
relevant part, “No person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be 
a witness against himsel f[.]”  U.S. Const. amend.  V.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
46 
 criminal proceedings or at the proceeding of another.  State v. 
Kupihea, 80 Hawaiʻ i 307, 313, 909 P.2d 1122, 1128 (1996). 
  In  evaluating the extent of a witness’ s Fifth 
Amendment privilege, this court has stated that the privilege 
does not protect against “remote possibilities [of future 
prosecution] out of the ordinary course  of law” but is instead 
“confined to instances where the witness has reasonable cause to 
apprehend danger from a direct answer.”  Kupihea, 80 Hawai ʻi at 
313, 909 P.2d at 1128 (alteration in original) ( first quoting 
Territory of Hawaii v. Lanier, 40 Haw. 65, 72 (Haw. Terr. 1953); 
and then quoting Hoffman v. United States, 341 U.S. 479, 486 
(1951)).  The privilege against self-incrimination “extends not 
only to answers that would in themselves support a conviction, 
but to those that would furnish a link in the chain of evidence 
needed to prosecute.”  Id. at 313, 909 P.2d at 1128 (quoting 
Lanier, 40 Haw. at 72).   
  Kato  argues that the circuit court incorrectly used a 
“possibility of prosecution standard” in assessing Miller’s 
invocation of the privilege instead of the  “reasonable cause to 
apprehend danger from a direct answer” standard.33  Kato also 
contends that there was no indication that the State would 
charge Miller for the CW’s stabbing  or prosecute M iller for the 
                                                           
 33 Although we resolve this case on other grounds, we address this 
issue in light of the possibility that it may arise again on retrial.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
47 
 abuse charge or any TRO violations, and thus he should not have 
been permitted to exercise his Fifth Amendment rights.   
  During the HRE Rule 104 hearing at trial, the circuit 
court allowed Miller to exercise his Fifth Amendment privilege 
on questions regarding his previous relationship with Kato and 
his communications with her  from August to October 2013,  because 
Miller could still be prosecuted for the abuse charge as it was 
dismissed without prejudice and could be charged with violating 
the TRO as it did not expire until December 25, 2013.  The court 
also allowed Miller to invoke the privilege with regard to 
questions that could have shown that Miller was angry at the CW 
for ending their relationship or dating other men and relating 
to communications he had with the CW after the end of their 
relationship that would show he knew the whereabouts of the CW.  
The court stated that answering questions about communications 
with Kato was going to “lead directly to” Miller arranging the 
stabbing and that answering questions about post -relationship 
communications with the CW would show that he knew her 
whereabouts near the time of the incident, which would furnish a 
link in the chain of prosecution.   
  Thus, the circuit court applied the correct legal 
standard in assessing Miller’s invocation of the Fifth Amendment 
privilege.  The court also did not abuse its discretion in 
concluding that Miller had reasonable cause to apprehend danger ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
48 
 from answers to questions regarding his previous relationship 
with Kato and communications with Kato from August to October 
2013, as Miller was still subject to prosecution for the abuse 
incident and for violation of the TRO.  Additionally, the court 
did not abuse its discretion in concluding that answers 
regarding motive to harm the CW and communications with the CW 
after the end of their relationship may have furnished a link in 
a chain of prosecution by showing that Miller had the motive and 
opportunity to assault the CW.  Accordingly
, the circuit court 
did not err in its rulings on Miller’s exercise of his Fifth 
Amendment privilege, which were properly affirmed by the ICA.34   
                                                           
 34 At trial, Kato argued that Miller had waived his Fifth Amendment 
privilege, and Kato briefly references this circumstance in her Application: 
“Miller had answered a number of questions after the first 104 hearing and 
then changed his positions during the second 104 hearing.”  The circuit court 
did not rule on whether Miller had waived the privilege.  On remand, if 
Miller again asserts his privilege to questions that he answered at his 
pretrial Rule 104 hearing, the court will need to address whether Miller 
waived his Fifth Amendment privilege under HRE Rule 511 (1993):  
 
A person upon whom  these rules confer a privilege against 
disclosure waives the privilege if, while holder of the 
privilege, the person or the person’s predecessor 
voluntarily discloses or consents to disclosure of any 
significant part of the privileged matter.  This rule does 
not apply if the disclosure itself is a privileged 
communication.   
 
See also Naipo v. Border, 125 Hawaiʻ i 31, 36, 251 P.3d 594, 599 (2011) 
(a witness voluntarily waives the privilege if the witness is 
“expressly advised of the privilege and testifies without asserting the 
privilege”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
49 
 D. The Circuit Court Did Not Plainly Err in  Failing to Give an 
Accomplice Instruction to the Jury.  
  On appeal, Kato argues that, based on the jury 
instructions given, she could only have been found guilty of 
reckless endangering in the second degree if the jury found her 
to be the principal actor, i.e., the person who committed the 
stabbing.  As the State only pursued a theory of principal 
liability and no accomplice instruction was given, Kato contends 
that she should not have been found guilty of reckless 
endangering in the second degree as the jury did not find her to 
be the principal actor.  This raises the question as to whether 
the circuit court plainly erred in not giving an accomplice 
instruction to the jury. 
 
 “[I]t is the duty of the trial court to ensure that 
the jury is properly instructed.”  State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai ʻi 
78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011).  In reviewing an omitted or 
flawed jury instruction, “we will vacate , without regard to 
whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable 
possibility that the error contributed to the defendant’s 
conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.”  DeLeon, 131 Hawai ʻi at 479, 
319 P.3d at 398 (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawaiʻi 327, 337, 
141 P.3d 974, 984 (2006) ).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
50 
   “The Hawaii and the federal Constitutions as well as 
our rules of penal procedure clearly require that appellants be 
informed of the charges against them.”  State v. Soares, 72 Haw. 
278, 281, 815 P.2d 428, 430 (1991)  (citing Haw. Const. art. I, §  
[14]; U.S. Const. amend.  VI; Hawai ʻi Rules of Penal Procedure 
Rule 7(d); State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 567 P.2d 1242 
(1977)).35  
  This court has held that a defendant does not need to 
be charged as an accomplice to permit the giving of an 
accomplice instruction.  State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 645, 586 
P.2d 250, 263 (1978) superseded by statute on other grounds as 
stated in Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 456 n.7, 848 P.2d 966, 
973 n.7 (1993) (holding that under the facts of the case, it was 
not error for the court to instruct on accomplice liability); 
State v. Fukusaku,  85 Hawai ʻi 462, 486, 946 
P.2d 32, 56 (1997) .  
However, charging a defendant as a principal is not necessarily 
sufficient to provide the defendant with adequate notice of the 
charges as constitutionally required.  Soares , 72 Haw. at 281, 
815 P.2d at 430; State v. Toma, No. SCAP-13 -0000029, at 5, 2015 
WL 9303983, at *17-18  (Dec. 21, 2015) (m em.) (Pollack, J., 
dissenting) (“[I]t does not follow that charging a defendant as 
                                                           
 35 See Haw. Const. art I, § 14  (“In all criminal prosecutions, the 
accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be informed of the nature and cause of 
the accusation . . . .”); U.S. Const. amend. VI (same).   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
51 
 a principal provides a defendant sufficient notice that he or 
she must also be prepared to defend against an accomplice theory 
of liability.”) ; see Fukusaku, 85 Hawai ʻi at 486, 9
46 P.2d at 56 
(discussing facts and circumstances of the case to determine 
whether the defendant had sufficient notice of the nature of the 
charges).  
  In this case, Kato was not charged as an accomplice in 
the alleged commission of the attempted murder offense, and thus 
she did not receive any notice that the evidence at trial may 
subject her to a conviction based upon accomplice liability.   
Additionally, it is undisputed that the State’s evidence was 
directed at proving that Kato was the person who stabbed the CW  
and the State did not present an accomplice theory of liability.   
Thus, the court did not plainly err in not submitting an 
accomplice instruct
ion to the jury .  
  Kato contends, however, that she was convicted as an 
accomplice, and not as a principal, despite the fact that the 
jury was not instructed on accomplice liability.  While there 
are certainly indications in the record that the jury may have 
concluded that Kato acted as an accomplice and not a  principal, 
it is not necessary for this court to resolve whether the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
52 
 possibility of such a determination prejudice d Kato in light of 
our disposition of this case on other grounds.36 
V. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, the ICA’s April 18, 2019 
Judgment on Appeal and the circuit court’s March 11, 2015 
judgment are vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
 
                                                           
 36 Kato also contends that there was not substantial evidence for 
the jury to convict her of reckless endangering in the second degree.  Our 
caselaw has established that this offense can be a lesser -included offense of 
attempted murder.  State v. Samonte, 83 Hawai ʻi 507, 541, 928 P.2d 1, 35 
(1996).  Appellate courts review the sufficiency of the evidence at trial for 
“substantial evidence.”  State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai ʻi 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 
61 (1996).   
  Looking at the evidence in the most favorable light to the 
prosecution, there is substantial evidence for the jury to conclude that Kato 
lured the CW to the location where she was attacked.  State v. Vliet, 91 
Hawaiʻi 288, 293, 983 P.2d 189, 194 (1999) (“[T]his court, in passing upon the 
sufficiency of the evidence, must view the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution . . . .”).  Messages retrieved on Kato’s phone 
provide evidence that she either operated the “Ai Akanishi” LINE ID or was in 
contact with “Ai Akanishi.”  Kato thus would have be en able to contact the CW 
as “Ai Akanishi” or would have been able to provide the CW’s LINE ID to “Ai 
Akanishi.”  Kato was identified near the scene of the attack when she sought 
to retrieve the phone that had apparently been dropped there by the 
assailant.  This evidence is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
allow the jury to find that Kato recklessly placed the CW in danger of death 
or serious bodily injury.  See HRS § 707- 714(1)(a).  Accordingly, there was 
substantial evidence to support Kato’s  conviction for reckless endangering in 
the second degree.   
 Myron H. Takemoto
for petitioner  
 
Stephen K. Tsushima 
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
