***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
ARLEY H. NOZAWA,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff- Appellant ,  
 
vs. 
 
OPERATING ENGINEERS LOCAL UNION NO. 3,  
Respondent/Defendant- Appellee,  
 
 
SCWC-14-0000021 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0000021; CIVIL NO. 11- 1-2623-10) 
 
APRIL 24, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
  This case involves a claim brought by an employee 
against her former employer for allegedly terminating her on the 
basis of her gender.  The circuit court granted summary judgment 
in favor of the employer, striking a declaration submitted in 
opposition and also rejecting the employee ’s own declarations as 
uncorroborated, self- serving, and conclusory.  We hold that Rule Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000021
24-APR-2018
08:08 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
2 56(e) of the Hawai i Rules of Civil Procedure does not preclude 
an affidavit from being self- serving, nor does it require an 
affidavit to be corroborated by independent evidence.  In 
addition, unlike the employee’s declarations in this case , an 
affidavit is conclusory if it expresses a conclusion  without 
stating the underlying facts or reaches a conclusion that is not 
reasonably drawn from the underlying facts.   
  We also hold that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in striking a  declaration submitted by the employee 
that compl ied with the circuit court’s order allowing 
supplemental briefing.  Accordingly, in light of the admissible 
evidence, there was a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether the employer’s proffered reasons for the employee ’s 
termination were based on pretext, and thus we conclude that the 
circuit court erroneously granted summary judgment in favor of 
the employer.   
I. BACKGROUND 
  Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3 (Local 3) is a 
labor organization with headquarters in Alameda, California.  
Local 3 operates a hiring or referral hall in accordance with 
its collective bargaining agreement with signatory contractors.  
Local 3 has a district office in the State of Hawai i (district 
office) that  is managed by the  local district representative ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
3 with the assist ance of an Officer -in-Charge, who is physically 
located in California.   
  On September 11, 2006, Arley Nozawa was hired as an 
at-will employee for the  single hiring hall dispatcher position  
in the district office.  As a dispatcher, Nozawa was responsible 
for referring  union members to employers in accordance with 
Local 3’s Job Placement Regulations (JPR).  In July 2010, Dan 
Reding became the O fficer-in-Charge of the district office, 
responsible for the hiring and firing decisions for Local 3 with 
the approval of the business manager, Russell Burns.   
  In January 2011, Pane Meatoga was appointed as the 
district representative.  Meatoga expressed a desire to bring in 
his own secretary and organizer.  At the time, the district 
office’s sole organizer was Donald Gentzler, who also performed 
the role of dispatcher when Nozawa was absent.  Two days after 
Meatoga’s effective start date , on February 3, 2011, Nozawa 
received a termination letter dated January 27, 2011.  The 
termination letter read in pertinent part as follows: “I regret 
to inform you that due to a reorganization and restructuring of 
the Hawaii district office operations, your employment with 
Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3 will be terminated as of 
February 3, 2011.”  Gentzler replaced Nozawa as dispatcher 
effective February 4, 2011,  and remained in that position until 
July 31, 2012-- when he was reassigned to the organizer position.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
4 A. Circuit Court 
  
On October 31, 2011, after exhausting her 
administrative remedies, Nozawa filed a complaint against Local 
3 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court), 
alleging inter alia that Local 3 violated Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 378- 2 by terminat ing her on the basis of her 
gender.1  The complaint asserted t hat Nozawa was suddenly and 
without cause terminated from her position as dispatcher by 
Local 3 and immediately replaced with a male dispatcher who 
received a pay raise and an increase in work hours,  despite work 
hours having been previously reduced for all dispatchers.  In 
addition, the complaint contended that at the time of her 
termination, Nozawa did not have any performance problems and 
was fully capable of performing her dispatcher duties in an 
exemplary manner.  Local 3 denied the allegations of gender 
discrimination in its answer to  Nozawa’s complaint.   
  
On February 12, 2013, Local 3 filed a motion for 
summary judgment, which included declarations from Toni Mendes 
and Reding.  Mendes identified herself as Local 3’s office 
systems and job placement center coordinator and stated that her 
workplace was in Sacramento, California.  Mendes declared that 
                     
 1 The complaint set forth four counts, three of which Nozawa 
voluntarily dismissed.  The dismissed counts are not further addressed.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
5 she began closely monitoring the technical aspects of Nozawa and 
other dispatchers’ work performance  
in late 2008 .  Attached to 
Mendes’ declaration was a JPR provision providing  that, subject 
to some exceptions, a dispatched employee who does not work at 
least forty-eight hours straight is entitled to return to the 
employee’s former position on the out-of -work list.2  
Mendes 
stated that Nozawa committed a serious dispatching error in 
January 2010 when she did not properly restore an employee, 
Richard Conradt, to his former place on the list in accordance 
with the JPR.   
 
 In his declaration, Reding stated  that Conradt 
subsequently filed an unfair labor practice claim against Local 
3, which it settled by  paying Conradt $19,866.40 in lost wages 
and fringe benefits and $5,500 in  legal fees.  Reding  maintained 
that no other dispatcher ha d ever committed  an error of this 
nature.  Reding further stated that he sought and received 
Burns’ approval to terminate Nozawa as a result of the error, 
but Eugene Soquena, the district representative at the time, 
requested that Nozawa be given a last chance to improve.  Hence, 
Reding continued, Nozawa was given a Final Written Warning 
                     
 2 The out-of-work list establishes  the priority in which out -of-
work union members are dispatched to available jobs.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
6 (Warning letter), dated April 19, 2010.  The Warning letter read 
as follows: 
It has come to our attention that you continue to make 
numerous mistakes in the discharge of your duties as 
Dispatcher.  Among others, key areas of deficiencies is 
your lack of a clear grasp and understanding of the Hawaii 
Job Placement Regulations (JPR).  Consequently, this has 
caused you to dispatch members improperly.  Additionally, 
there is an inordinate amount of registration overrides 
caused by errors.  Some of these overrides used incorrect 
dates which allowed our members and others to be dispatched 
incorrectly, seriously exposing our local to potential 
legal liability.  Recently, this transgression manifested 
itself in the dispatch of member Richard Conrad, Jr.  We 
are still assessing the potential damage this error may 
ultimately cause.   
 
This will serve notice to you that any further mistakes on 
your behalf in carrying out your duties, will result in the 
immediate termination of your employment with OE3.  
Additionally, if in the course of our investigation in the 
processing of Mr. Conrad’s registration and dispatch, we 
find additional errors, you will be subject to immediate 
termination of employment.   
  M endes also stated in her declaration that, even prior 
to the error involving Conradt and after the Warning letter, 
Nozawa made a number of recurring errors related to registration 
overrides and the placement of employees on the out- of-work 
list.  According to Mendes, f rom late 2008 until Nozawa’s 
termination, Mendes engaged in an effort to train Nozawa but she 
continuously failed to fully comprehend the dispatching rules 
and procedures.   As examples, Mendes attached  email 
correspondences between her self and Nozawa from June to August 
2010 in which they discussed the timing of monthly registration 
lists, an override adjustment for an employee , and the dues  for 
retirees.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
7   Reding declared  that his suggestion to Meatoga to 
replace Nozawa with Gentzler was based on Gentzler ’s impending 
displacement as organizer and the reports of Mendes that Nozawa 
continued to make dispatching errors following the Warning
 
letter.  Gentzler was hired in September 2007 as an organizer, 
Reding stated, and he had extensive experience with the JPR and 
the collective bargaining agreement and had not received any 
written warnings for deficient work performance.  
Reding also 
explained that the increase in work hours for Gentzler was based 
on a preexisting plan to return dispatchers to the forty-five-
hour week, as well as the lack of a backup dispatcher.3   
  
Based on these declarations, Local 3 argued  that in 
reorganizing the district office, it decided to terminate Nozawa 
in order to retain Gentzler, an experienced dispatcher with no 
history of work performance problems and a clean disciplinary 
record.  Local 3 thus maintained that it had articulated 
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Nozawa’s termination.   
 
 In opposition, Nozawa  averred in her declaration that 
she was falsely accused of making an error regarding the 
placement of Conradt and that she had followed proper protocol.  
Nozawa stated that her supervisor at the time, Soquena, never 
                     
 3 In her declaration, Mendes explained that the work hours for 
dispatchers were decreased in late December 2010 due to the depressed 
economy.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
8 informed her during her employment of any work performance 
problems that he had perceived.   Soquena stopped the impending 
termination because she had not made a mistake,  Nozawa 
explained, and  she signed the Warning letter but disputed that 
she had made a mistake.   
  Additionally,  Nozawa stated in her declaration that  
she had always received excellent employment evaluations,  she 
did not have work performance problems when she was terminated, 
and she was fully capable of performing her job at the time of 
termination.   Pointing to the termination letter she received, 
Nozawa attested  that her termination was the result of an 
alleged reorganization and restructuring, not  disciplinary 
action, and  that she was terminated without cause.  Nozawa also 
declared that Gentzler had little experience as a dispatcher and 
that when he replaced her, his work hours increased at an 
increased pay.   
  Nozawa  argued in her opposition that she received no 
further write- ups or warnings following the Warning letter and 
that, based on  the record,  there were issues of material fact ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
9 related to her termination that required denial of Local 3’s 
motion.4   
  
Local 3 replied,  attaching a supplemental  declaration 
from Mendes stating that she supervised the technical aspects of 
Nozawa’s work performance and it was her honest assessment that 
Nozawa had performance issues.  Mendes disputed that Nozawa had 
always received excellent employment evaluations,  that she did 
not have performance problems and was fully capable of 
performing her job at the time of termination, and that she  was 
falsely accused of the error involving Conradt.   
  Local 3 argued  in its reply that Nozawa  provided 
“uncorroborated, self-serving, conclusory statements” that did 
not satisfy the requirements of Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 56(e) and were insufficient to defeat summary 
judgment.  Local 3 also contended that Nozawa
 was not competent 
to testify to matters related to her own work  performance and 
qualifications.   
Additionally, Local 3  submitted  that Nozawa’s 
termination was based on its  honest belief that  reorganization 
was the most practical method of accommodating Meatoga’s desire 
                     
 4 Nozawa later argued  that the email exchanges between herself and 
Mendes that occurred after she received the Warning letter did not  show that 
she had made mistakes.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
10 to hire a new organizer.   Local 3 added that there was no 
evidence anyone other than Nozawa committed the error involving 
Conradt and that, in any event, Nozawa was not terminated 
because of this error.  Local 3 also asserted that the fact that 
Nozawa did not receive a further write-up after the Warning 
letter did not establish pretext because 
Nozawa was an at-will 
employee who could be terminated at any time, “for any reason, 
fair or unfair, with or without notice or warning.”   
  After  the initial hearing on the motion for summary 
judgment,5 Local 3 moved for  leave to submit supplemental 
briefing, contending that it was necessary for the court to 
receive documents pertinent to certain declarations made by 
Nozawa.  The circuit court granted the motion and issued an 
order, stating that Local 3 “has leave to file a Supplemental 
Memorandum in Support of its Motion” and Nozawa “may file a 
Supplemental Memorandum in Opposition addressing Defendant’s 
Supplemental Memorandum .”   
  Local 3 ’s supplemental reply, which included exhibits 
and a declaration from Mendes,6 argued that Nozawa had committed 
                     
 5 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided over the summary 
judgment proceedings.   
 6 Mendes averred that, based on the computer printouts attached to 
her declaration, she had an honest and sincere belief that Nozawa did in fact 
enter incorrect registration dates for Conradt.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
11 placement errors involving Conradt, that Nozawa made subsequent 
errors, and that Reding recommended that Nozawa be terminated as 
part of a staffing reorganization.  Local 3 
maintained that, 
based on these facts, there was no evidence of dishonesty or 
pretext and that an employer’s belief that an employee committed 
misconduct is a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reaso n for 
termination.   
 
 Nozawa filed a supplemental opposition supported by 
her declaration and a declaration from Local 3’s former 
treasurer, William Mahoe (Mahoe Declaration).  In his 
declaration, Mahoe stated that he  was appointed treasurer of 
Local 3 in January 2009.  H e averred that , while serving as 
treasurer, he attended union meetings in 2009 and 2010 at which  
Burns, Reding, and other Local 3 officers were present.  Mahoe 
stated that at these meetings the officers of Local 3 discussed 
replacing women dispatchers with men, to which he objected.  
Mahoe also stated that he wanted Nozawa to remain in her 
position as dispatcher; he felt that she was doing a good job.  
Mahoe indicated that he resigned from Local 3 on January 23, 
2011, and that he understood Nozawa was replaced by a male 
dispatcher shortly thereafter.   
  In her declaration, Nozawa explained that Conradt 
constantly worked jobs of short duration and that,  in accordance 
with the JPR, she placed him at the bottom of the out -of-work ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
12 list until he provided the necessary paperwork showing that he 
was laid off prior to working forty-eight hours straight.  When 
Conradt provided the required documentation, Nozawa averred, she 
would perform an override to ret urn him to his former position 
on the list after obtaining the requisite authorization code 
from Mendes.  Nozawa argued in her supplemental opposition that 
the alleged mistakes asserted by Local 3 were  merely a pretext 
for gender discrimination.   
  During Nozawa’s argument at a second hearing on the 
motion for summary judgment, t he circuit court  raised sua sponte 
the propriety of the submission of the Mahoe Declaration.   The 
court st ated that it seemed to go beyond the scope of the 
suppleme ntal briefing, which the court believed  “was just for 
the purposes of the false accusation.”  Nozawa explained that 
she was not able to obtain the Mahoe Declaration when  she 
initially filed her opposition and that, in any event , the Mahoe 
Declaration wa s properly before the court as she should be 
permitted to respond to Local 3’s  supplemental reply .   
  Local 3  asserted  that Nozawa’s supplemental opposition  
raised entirely new theories,  the theories did not relate to her 
claim that she was falsely accused of the error involving 
Conradt,  and the supplemental opposition exceeded  the scope of 
the court’s order.  The court concurred in Local 3’s assessment  
but upon  reviewing the order acknowledged that the terms of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
13 order had not limited the supplemental briefing to the “false 
accusation.”  The circuit court nonetheless indicated that its 
recollection was that Local 3 specifically sought to supplement 
its briefing 
as to Nozawa’s claim  that she was falsely accused 
of the error involving Conradt.  Over Nozawa’s objection, t he 
court struck the Mahoe Declaration as beyond the scope of the 
limited supplemental briefing and supplemental response.7   
  The circuit court 
then considered Nozawa’s 
declarations and found that Nozawa’s statement that she was 
falsely accused of the error involving Conradt was 
unsubstantiated.  The court also determined that the evidence 
adduced by Nozawa consisted of “
uncorroborated, self-serving, 
conclusory statements ” that were not sufficient to establish 
genuine issues of material fact under the summary judgment 
standard.8  Ruling that the declarations lacked the competent 
evidence required under HRCP Rule 56 to show pretext, the court 
granted Local 3’s motion for summary judgment.   
  
The circuit court entered its final judgment on 
October 18, 2013.  Nozawa filed a motion for reconsideration, in 
                     
 7 The court also denied Nozawa’s request to suppl ement her briefing 
and to allow Local 3 to respond.   
 8 The court cited Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc. , 281 F.3d 
1054 (9th Cir. 2002), and Hansen v. United States , 7 F.3d 137 (9th Cir. 
1993).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
14 which she argued that the Mahoe Declaration responded to the  
supplemental reply and did not go beyond the scope of the 
supplemental briefing.  The court denied the motion.  Nozawa 
timely filed a notice of appeal to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA) from the circuit court’s final judgment  and the 
order denying the motion for reconsideration.   
B. ICA Proceedings 
  
In her appeal, Nozawa contended that the circuit court 
(1) abused its discretion when it struck the Mahoe Declaration9 
and (2) erred in granting Local 3’s motion for summary judgment .   
  In a memorandum opinion
, the ICA affirmed the circuit 
court’s final judgment.10  First, the ICA found  that the 
supplemental briefing was limited to Nozawa’s claim that she was 
falsely accused in the Conradt incident, that the Mahoe 
Declaration exceeded this scope, and that the circuit court 
accordingly did not abuse its discretion in striking the Mahoe 
Declaration.   
  
Second, the ICA determin ed that Local 3 articulated 
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for terminating Nozawa and 
                     
9 Nozawa alternatively contended that the circuit court  abused its 
discretion in denying her request to supplement her briefing.    
 10 The ICA’s memorandum opinion can be found at Nozawa v. Operating 
Engineers Local Union No. 3 , NO. CAAP- 14-0000021, 2017 WL 2670800 (Haw. App. 
June 21, 2017). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
15 that the burden shifted to Nozawa  to demonstrate that  Local 3’s 
proffered reasons were pretextual.  The ICA foun d that the only 
proper evidence that Nozawa provided to support her gender 
discrimination claim were her declarations, which included the 
averment that she always received ex
cellent employment 
evaluations.  The ICA noted that, while Nozawa stated that she 
signed the Warning letter  but disputed that she had made a 
mistake, Nozawa did not provide documentation or further 
details.  The ICA  further  found that Nozawa did not contest that 
a staff reorganizatio n occurred after Meatoga’s appointment and 
Nozawa did not provide evidence that she was more qualified for 
the dispatcher position than Gentzler.   Thus, the ICA concluded 
that Nozawa failed to show that there wa s a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether Local 3’s proffered reasons for her 
termination were pretextual.   
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW  
  
This court reviews an award of summary judgment de 
novo under the same standard applied by the lower court.  Adams 
v. CDM Media USA, Inc. , 135 Hawaii 1, 12, 346 P.3d 70, 81 (2015) 
(citing Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc. , 94 Hawai i 368, 376, 14 P.3d 
1049, 1057 (2000)).    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
16 III.  DISCUSSION 
  On certiorari, Nozawa presents two questions for 
review: (1) whether the ICA erred in failing to view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to her as the non- moving 
party in the summary judgment proceeding and (2) whether the ICA 
erred in failing to consider her  declarations and the 
declaration of Mahoe.   
  In response, Local 3 contends that the ICA considered  
Nozawa’s declarations, neither of which satisfied the 
requirements of HRCP Rule 56(e); the circuit court properly 
struck the Mahoe Declaration, which exceeded the scope of the 
supplemental briefing;  and the ICA viewed  the evidence in the 
light most favorable to Nozawa,  who failed to dispute  the 
staffing reorganization, Gentzler’s work performance, and his 
knowledge about the collective bargaining agreement and the JPR.    
A. The Circuit C ourt And The ICA E rred In Not According T he 
Proper Weight To Nozawa ’s Declarations  
  Pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(e) (2000 ), affidavits 
supporting or opposing a motion for summary judgment “ shall be 
made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would 
be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the 
affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. ”  
Thus, affidavits that state ultimate or conclusory facts cannot 
be used in support of or in opposition to a motion for summary ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
17 judgment.  GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian , 79 Hawaii 516, 525, 904 
P.2d 530, 539  (App. 1995) .   
  In this case, Nozawa’s declarations included 
statements that related to her general work performance as a 
dispatcher and the specific  incident involving Conradt that 
resulted in the Warning letter.  The circuit court gave no 
weight to either category 
of Nozawa’s statements , while the ICA 
gave no weight to the latter.   
1. Nozawa’s general work p erformance  
  We turn  first to Nozawa’s statements related to her 
general work performance as a dispatcher.  In her first 
declaration, Nozawa stated that she always received excellent 
employment evaluations and was not informed by Soquena of any 
work performance concerns.  Nozawa also stated that she did not 
have work performance problems and was fully capable of 
performing her job at the time she was terminated.   
Additionally, Nozawa pointed to the termination letter she 
received, which informed her that she was terminated not because 
of any disciplinary action but based on
 reasons related to 
reorganization and restructuring.   
  The circuit court rejected Nozawa’s declarations, 
finding that Nozawa’s statements did not satisfy HRCP Rule 56(e) 
because they were uncorroborated, self-serving, and conclusory.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
18 The circuit court’s ruling indicate s that it misconstrued the 
standard for affidavits or declarations supporting or opposing a 
summary judgment motion.  HRCP Rule 56(e ) provides  that 
affidavits shall set forth facts based on personal knowledge.  
Thus, an affidavit by its nature includes an affiant’s own 
perception of the matter.  
See Commentary to Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 602 (1993) (“‘Personal knowledge, ’ for 
purposes of [HRE Rule 602], means that the witness perceived the 
event about which [the witness] testifies and that [the witness]  
has a present recollection of that perception .”).   
  T he circuit court’s rejection  of Nozawa’s  statements  
as “self-serving” is thus misplaced.  HRCP Ru le 56(e) does not 
preclude an affidavit from being self- serving.  Indeed, as the 
Eleventh Circuit recently observed, “most affidavits submitted 
[in response to a summary judgment motion] are self- serving.”  
United States v. Stein , 881 F.3d 853, 857 (11th Cir. 2018)
 
(alteration in original)  (quoting Payne v. Pauley , 337 F.3d 767, 
772 (7th Cir. 2003)) ( “[N]othing in Rule 56 (or, for that 
matter, in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure) prohibits an 
affidavit from being self- serving.”).11  Thus, a party’s self-
                     
 11 Where a federal rule of procedure is substantially similar to a 
Hawaii rule of procedure, this  court may look to federal caselaw for 
guidance.  Stallard v. Consol. Maui, Inc. , 103 Hawai i 468, 475, 83 P.3d 731, 
738 (2004).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
19 serving statements that otherwise comply with HRCP Rule 56(e) 
can be utilized to defeat summary judgment.  Id.; Price v. Time, 
Inc., 416 F.3d 1327, 1345, modified on other grounds on denial 
of reh’g , 425 F.3d 1292 (11th Cir. 2005) (“Courts routinely and 
properly deny summary j udgment on the basis of a party’ s sworn 
testimony even though it is self -serving.”) .   
  Additionally,  HRCP Rule 56(e) does not require a 
statement in an affidavit to be corroborated in order to be a 
qualifying affidavit under the rule .  HRCP Rule 56(e) ; Stein, 
881 F.3d at 858 (“N or does Rule 56 require that an otherwise 
admissible affidavit be corroborated by independent evidence. ”).  
As the Stein court observed , “If corroboration is needed, then 
that requirement must come from a source other than Rule 56 .”  
Stein, 881 F.3d at 858; Strickland v. Norfolk S. Ry. Co. , 692 
F.3d 1151, 1160 (11th Cir. 2012) (“[E]ven in the absence of 
collaborative evidence, a plaintiff’s own testimony may be 
sufficient to withstand summary judgment. ” (citation omitted)) .  
Indeed, a requirement that an affidavit be corroborated would 
establish a higher standard for admissibility than that required 
for the introduction of evidence at trial.  Nor has this court 
ever held that an uncorroborated statement by a party to the 
litigation is insufficient to raise a dispute as to a material 
fact.  
See, e.g., Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co. , 133 Hawaii 332, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
20 357-58, 328 P.3d 341, 366-67 (2014) (holding that  the 
plaintiff’s declaration presented sufficient evidence to raise 
an issue of material fact as to whether his termination was 
based on pretext); Acoba v. Gen. Tire, Inc. , 92 Hawaii 1, 14-15, 
986 P.2d 288, 301-02 (1999) (concluding that an affidavit--
submitted in opposition-- alone was sufficient to defeat the 
defendant’s motion for summary judgment) .   
  Finally, the circuit court misapprehended what 
constitutes a conclusory statement in the context of HRCP Rule 
56(e).  “Conclusory” is defined as “[e]xpressing  a factual 
inference without stating the underlying facts on which the 
inference is based.”  Conclusory, Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th 
ed. 2014).  An “inference” in turn is “a conclusion reached by 
considering other facts and deducing a logical consequence from 
them.”  Inference, Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014); see 
also 23B Am. Jur. Pleading and Practice Forms  § 244 (2017) (“An 
inference is a deduction of fact that the jury may logically and 
reasonably draw from another fact or facts found or otherwise 
established in the trial.”).   Thus, when an assertion in an 
affidavit expresses an inference without setting forth the 
underlying facts on which the conclusion is based or states a 
conclusion that is not reasonably drawn from the underlying 
facts, the assertion is considered conclusory and cannot be ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
21 utilized in support of or against  a motion for summary judgment.  
See Conclusory, Inference ; see also Lujan v. Nat ’l Wildlife  
Fed’n, 497 U.S. 871, 888 (1990) (noting that the object of the 
requirement in Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e) that 
affidavits “set forth specific facts showing that there is a 
genuine issue for trial ” is not to make permissible conclusory 
allegations in an affidavit).  On the other hand, an inference 
within an affidavit t hat is based on stated facts from which the 
conclusion may reasonably be drawn is not conclusory and may be 
used to support or oppose a motion for summary judgment.  
  To be sure, the underlying facts and the inference 
must be based on personal knowledge and otherwise admissible in 
evidence.  HRCP Rule 56(e).  Inferences that amount to opinions 
thus must satisfy relevant evidentiary rules that would apply 
were the evidence offered through witness testimony.  Lay 
opinions must be both “ rationally based on the perception of 
the” affiant and “ helpful to a clear understanding of the 
[affiant’s] testimony or the determination of a fact in i ssue.”  
HRE Rule 701 (1993).  An affiant generally may “give an opinion 
on an ultimate fact involved in the case ” when such an opinion 
is properly supported by facts personally perceived.12  See 
                     
 12 The Commentary to HRE Rule 704 clarifies that courts are 
empowered to exclude opinions on “ultimate facts” that are not helpful to the 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
22 Samson v. Nahulu , 136 Hawai i 415, 429, 363 P.3d 263, 277 (2015) 
(citing HRE Rule 704); HRE Rule 701 .  But the affiant “ may not 
give opinions on questions of law as that would amount to legal 
conclusions.”13  Nahulu, 136 Hawaii at 429, 363 P.3d at 277 
(citing HRE Rule 704).  Indeed, a ny legal conclusions drawn by 
the affiant are not admissible evidence, regardless of whether 
they are couched as the affiant’s opinion .  Pulawa v. GTE 
Hawaiian Tel , 112 Hawai i 3, 15, 143 P.3d 1205, 1217 (2006).    
  T he statements in Nozawa ’s declarations that she 
always received excellent employment evaluations and that she 
was not informed by Soquena of any work performance issues were 
specific, factual 
information personally known to  Nozawa.  As 
additional support of her assessment regarding her work 
performance, Nozawa highlighted that the termination letter she 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
trier of fact under HRE Rules 701 and 702, as well as those that are 
“prejudicial, confusing, misleading, unnecessarily cumulative, or lacking in 
trustworthiness” under HRE Rule 403.  Commentary to HRE Rule 704  (1993).  
Opinions that “merely tell the jury what result to reach” are inadmissible 
under these provisions.  Id.; accord State v. Pinero , 70 Haw. 509, 520 –21, 
778 P.2d 704, 712 (1989) (excluding expert testimony that death was homicide 
and not accident in murder trial as beyond the scope of admissible opinion).  
 13 The Commentary to HRE Rule 704 illustrates the distinction 
between an opinion on an ultimate fact and a statement of law.  “[T]he 
question, ‘Did T have the capacity to make a will?’ would be excluded, while 
the question, ‘Did T have sufficient mental capacity to know the nature and 
extent of his property and the natural objects of his bounty and to formulate 
a rational scheme of dist ribution?’ would be allowed.”   Commentary to HRE 
Rule 704.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
23 received stated her discharge was the result of reorganization--
not disciplinary action.  In light of these statements, Nozawa 
had a factual basis to reasonably infer that she did not have 
work performance problems and was fully capable of performing 
her duties at the time of termination.14  To the extent these 
conclusions amounted to opinions, they were rationally based on 
Nozawa’s personal perception s and may have been helpful to a 
clear understanding of her declaration and a fact at issue, 
i.e., whether Local 3’s claim that Nozawa was terminated for 
deficient performance was a pretext for discrimination.15  
Further, the statements did not amount to legal conclusion
s 
because they were essentially factual in nature and did not 
attempt to apply a legal standard.  
Nozawa did not simply state, 
for example, that her 
termination violated HRS § 378 -2 or that 
it was motivated by discriminatory intent, which would not have 
been admissible evidence that could be considered for 
purposes 
of summary judgment.   
                     
 14 In the absence of a factual basis, neither an employee nor an 
employer’s subjective assessment of the employee’ s work performance is 
admissible evidence upon which summary judgment can be based.  See  HRE Rule 
701; HRCP Rule 56(e).  
 15 As stated, the trial court had discretion in accordance with  HRE 
Rules 403 and 701 to exclude statements of Nozawa’s  opinion.  T here is no 
indication the court based its ruling on these grounds .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
24   Because  Nozawa did not express a conclusion  without 
stating the underlying facts  or reach a conclusion that was not 
reasonably drawn from the underlying facts, see  Conclusory , 
Inference , these statements were not conclusory and were in 
compliance with HRCP Rule 56(e).  And to the extent that some of 
Nozawa’s statements were opinions , they were not clearly 
inadmissible under governing evidentiary rules. 
  Accordingly, the circuit court erred in finding that 
Nozawa’s declarations were not competent evidence under HRCP 
Rule 56 because they were self-serving, conclusory, and 
uncorroborated.16   
2. Nozawa’s alleged error involving Conradt  
  Nozawa’s  statements  in her declarations also related 
to the alleged error involving Conradt.   The ICA found that 
Nozawa provided no documentation or further details regarding 
                     
 16 In ruling upon Nozawa’s declarations, the circuit court cited 
Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air , Inc., 281 F.3d 1054 (9th Cir. 2002), for the 
proposition that uncorroborated, conclusory, or self -serving statements 
cannot defeat summary judgment.  However, unlike the plaintiff in Villiarimo, 
who the Court of Appeals found had made assertions that were not supported by 
the evidence in the record, 281 F.3d at 1063 -64, Nozawa submitted statements 
in compliance with the  admissibility requirements  of HRCP Rule 56(e).   
  The circuit court also relied on Hansen v. United States , 7 F.3d 
137 (9th Cir. 1993), to support its finding that Nozawa’s declarations were 
insufficient to defeat summary judgment.  In Hansen, the Court of Appeals 
stated that a nonmoving party that relies only on its own affidavits “cannot 
rely on conclusory allegations unsupported by factual data to create an issue 
of material fact.”  7 F.3d at 138.  As stated,  Nozawa’s declarations 
contained assertions that were based on her personal knowledge and that would 
be admissible in evidence.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
25 her statement that she disputed the contents of the Warning 
letter.  As stated above, there is no requirement that a 
declaration in opposition to a summary judgment motion be 
corroborated by independent evidence.  See Stein, 881 F.3d at 
858.  Nozawa was thus not required to provide additional 
documentation regarding her statement.  T he evidenc e in the 
record also contradicts the ICA ’s conclusion that Nozawa failed 
to provide further details regarding the event
.   
  The Warning letter specified that Nozawa had entered 
incorrect dates resulting in members, and specifically Conradt, 
being dispatched incorrectly.  Nozawa averred that she had been 
falsely accused of making a mistake as to Conradt, 
stating that 
she had followed proper protocol.  Nozawa explained that she 
performed override corrections for Conradt in accordance with 
the JPR and  with Mendes’ approval .  Nozawa ’s declaration 
indicated that she dealt directly  with Conradt when the alleged 
errors occurred, and thus she would have had personal knowledge  
of Conradt’s paperwork.   Further, Nozawa stated that when she 
was to be terminated for the alleged error involving Conradt, 
Soquena intervened and stopped the termination.  Thus, Nozawa 
did provide additional details disputing the Warning letter.   
  Accordingly,  the circuit court and the ICA  erred in 
not properly considering Nozawa’s declarations  as to the alleged  
error involving Conradt.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
26 B. The Circuit Court Abused Its Discretion In Striking The Mahoe 
Declaration 
  During the continued summary judgment hearing, the 
circuit court stated that the Mahoe Declaration seemed to exceed 
the limited scope of the supplemental briefing order, which the 
court believed  “was just for the purposes of the false 
accusation.”  After reviewing the order, which stated that 
Nozawa “may  file a S upplemental  Memorandum in Opposition 
addressing Defendant’s Supplemental Memorandum ,” the court 
acknowledged that the order  did not in fact contain such a 
limitation.  The court nonetheless struck the Mahoe Declaration 
based on its recollection of the purpose of the supplemental 
briefing.   
 
 The order granting the motion for leave  expressly 
permitted Nozawa to file a supplemental memorandum addressing  
Local 3’s supplemental reply.   Local 3’s supplemental reply  
argued that there was no disputed fact as to Nozawa’s deficient 
work performance, Nozawa’s alleged error involving Conradt, and 
the reorganization that occurred
.  Additionally, Local 3 
contended that there was no evidence of dishonesty as to its 
reasons for terminating Nozawa
 and no evidence of pretext,  and 
thus it was entitled to summary judgment.   
  Nozawa, in response,  submitted a  supplemental 
opposition with her own declaration and a declaration from ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
27 Mahoe.  The Mahoe Declaration provided evidence that indicated  
Nozawa may have been terminated based on her gender and not due 
to inadequate work performance or reorganization as Local 3 
maintained.  Mahoe averred that, while treasurer, he attended 
meetings in 2009 and 2010 at which Local 3 officers discusse
d 
replacing women dispatchers with men.  The Mahoe Declaration 
named Burns and Reding as two of the officers present during 
those meetings, both of whom  were involved in the decision to 
terminate Nozawa.  Reding was also involved in the decision to 
discipline Nozawa over the Conradt incident.  Mahoe additionally 
declared that he believed
 Nozawa was doing a good job and that 
he wanted her to remain 
in her position as dispatcher.   
  T he Mahoe Declaration therefore addressed the 
arguments raised in Local 3’s supplemental reply regarding the 
quality of Nozawa’s work , the alleged error involving Conradt, 
and the presence of dishonesty or pretext in the decision to 
terminate Nozawa .  The declaration was accordingly  within the 
scope of the circuit court’ s order granting leave to submit 
supplemental briefing.   
  An abuse of discretion occurs when a court “clearly 
exceed[s] the bounds of reason or disregard
[s] rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant.”  Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co. , 
74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992) (citing State v. Akina , ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
28 73 Haw. 75, 78, 828 P.2d 269, 271 (1992)).  Here, the circuit 
court disregarded principles of law or practice by striking the 
Mahoe Declaration, which was in compliance with the court’s 
order.  Thus, the circuit court abused its discretion in not 
considering the Mahoe Declaration, substantially prejudicing 
Nozawa’s ability to controvert Local 3’s supplemental reply.   
C. There Is A Genuine Issue O f Material Fact As To Whether Local 
3’s Reasons F or Terminating Nozawa W ere Pretextual 
 
  “[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, 
together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.”   Adams v. CDM 
Media USA, Inc. , 135 Hawai i 1, 12, 346 P.3d 70, 81 (2015) 
(alteration in original) (quoting Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc. , 94 
Hawaii 368, 376, 14 P.3d 1049, 1057 (2000)).  “A fact is 
material if proof of that fact would have the effect of 
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a 
cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.”  Id. 
(quoting  Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 376, 14 P.3d at 1057).   
  The burden is on the moving party to establish that 
summary judgment is proper.  French v. Haw. Pizza Hut, Inc. , 105 
Hawaii 462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004) .  “This burden always 
remains with the moving party and requires the moving party to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
29 convince the court that no genuine issue of material fact exists 
and that the moving part[y]  is entitled to summary judgment as a 
matter of law.”  Id.  (citation omitted).   
  “[O]nce a summary judgment movant has satisfied its 
initial burden of producing support for its claim that there is 
no genuine issue of material fact, the party opposing summary 
judgment must ‘demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general 
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial. ’”  
Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co. , 133 Hawai i 332, 359, 328 P.3d 
341, 368 (2014) (quoting French, 105 Hawai i at 470, 99 P.3d at 
1054).  “[T]he evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non- moving party.”  Adams, 135 Hawaii at 12, 
346 P.3d at 81 (alteration in original) (quoting Shoppe , 94 
Hawaii at 376, 14 P.3d at 1057).   
  HRS § 378- 2(a)(1)(A) (1993 and Supp. 2010 ) provides as 
follows: “It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: (1)  
Because of . . . sex . . . For any employer to . . . discharge 
from employment . . . any individual.”   Thus, HRS § 378- 2 
prohibits an employer from discharging a person because of that 
person’s gender.17  Discrimination may be proven by 
                     
 17 Employers of at -will employees are subject to the provisions of 
HRS § 378- 2.  HRS chapter 378 defines “e mployer” as “any person, including 
the State or any of its political subdivisions and any agent of such person, 
having one or more employees, but shall not include the United States.”  HRS 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
30 circumstantial evidence.  Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 378, 14 P.3d at  
1059.  When analyzing a claim of discrimination that relies on 
circumstantial evidence, we engage in a three- step analysis.   
Adams, 135 Hawai i at 13, 346 P.3d at 82 (citing Shoppe, 94 
Hawaii at 378-79, 14 P.3d at 1059-60).   
First, the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of 
discrimination by demonstrating, by a preponderance of 
evidence, the following four elements: (1) that plaintiff 
is a member of a protected class; (2) that plaintiff is 
qualified for  the position . . . from which plaintiff has 
been discharged; (3) that plaintiff has suffered some 
adverse employment action, such as a discharge; and (4) 
that the position still exists.   
Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059 (citation omitted).    
  Second, “[o]nce the plaintiff establishes a prima 
facie case of discrimination, the burden of production shifts to 
the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reason for the adverse employment action.”  Adams, 135 Hawai i at 
13, 346 P.3d at 82 (citing Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 378, 14 P.3d at 
1059).  “The employer’ s explanation must be in the form of 
admissible evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if 
believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
§ 378-1 (1993).  “ In enacting the employment discrimination law, the 
legislature intended that all employers, regardless of size, be subjected to 
its provisions.”   Sam Teague, Ltd. v. Hawai i Civil Rights Comm’n , 89 Hawai i 
269, 281, 971 P.2d 1104, 1116 (1999)  (referencing  definition of “employer”  in 
HRS § 378– 1 (1993)).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
31 unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged 
employment action. ”  Id. (citing Shoppe , 94 Hawai i at 378, 14 
P.3d at 1059).18   
  Third, “ if the employer rebuts the prima facie case, 
the burden reverts to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the 
defendant’s proffered reasons were ‘ pretextual. ’”  Id. at 14, 
346 P.3d at 83 (citing Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 379, 14 P.3d at 
1060).   
  Summary judgment is improper if there is a genuine 
issue as to whether a defendant ’s reasons for terminating the 
plaintiff are a pretext for discrimination.  See Simmons v. Aqua 
Hotels & Resorts, Inc. , 130 Hawaii 325, 331 -32, 310 P.3d 1026, 
1032-33 (App. 2013) (finding that a fact issue existed as to 
whether the defendant’s reasons were pretextual);  see also  
Shoppe, 94 Hawai i at 382, 14 P.3d at 1063 (“Plaintiff has not 
alerted this court to any other evidence that would give rise to 
a genuine issue of material fact” as to whether the defendant’s 
reason for taking adverse employment action against the 
plaintiff was pretextual).   
                     
 18 The ICA’s decision and the parties’ arguments on certiorari 
predominantly focus on pretext.  In light of our resolution of this issue, we 
do not consider whether there was a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether Local 3 articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its 
adverse employment action against Nozawa.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
32   In supp ort of its motion for summary judgment, Local 3 
submitted declarations stating  that it terminated Nozawa as part 
of a staffing reorganization to retain Gentzler, who unlike 
Nozawa had not committed a serious dispatching error and did not 
have work performance problems.  Nozawa responded with evidence 
indicating that her termination 
was not based on the reasons 
provided by Local 3 but, rather, because of her gender.  Nozawa  
declared that she did not have work performance problems and was 
fully capable of performing her job at the time of termination; 
her supervisor, Soquena, never informed her of any work 
performance problems; and she always received excellent 
employment evaluations.  Nozawa also pointed to the termination 
letter she received, which stated  that her termination was the 
result of reorganization and restructuring and did not reference 
inadequate work performance.19  As to the alleged error involving 
Conradt, Nozawa explained that she had followed established 
procedure in obtaining a code from Mendes after Conradt provided 
the necessary paperwork in accordance with the JPR, and she then 
performed the override corrections.   
  
Further, in the Mahoe Declaration attached to Nozawa’s 
supplemental opposition, Mahoe averred that, while treasurer, he 
                     
 19 The parties  also provide differing views  as to whether the email 
exchanges between Nozawa and Mendes after the Warning letter demonstrate that 
Nozawa continued to make mistakes.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
33 attended meetings in 2009 and 2010 at which Local 3 officers 
discussed replacing women dispatchers with men.  Mahoe stated  
that he objected, as he felt Nozawa was doing a good job and 
wanted her to remain as the dispatcher.  Additionally, Mahoe 
named Reding and Burns as two of the officers present at the 
specified meetings, and as Local 3’s evidence shows, both Reding 
and Burns were involved in the decision to terminate Nozawa.   
  
In sum, Nozawa provided evidence contradicting Local 
3’s contention that she was terminated due to reorganization and 
deficient job performance
.  Thus, the evidence, viewed in the 
light most favorable to Nozawa, demonstrates that there is a 
genuine issue as to whether Local 3’s reasons for terminating 
her were pretextual.20  “[S]ummary judgment should not be granted 
unless the entire record shows a right to judgment with such 
clarity as to leave no room for controversy and establishes 
affirmatively that the adverse party cannot prevail under any 
circumstances.”  Simmons, 130 Hawai i at 332, 310 P.3d at 1033 
(alteration in original) (quoting Balthazar v. Verizon Haw.,  
                     
 20 Relying on Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc. , 281 F.3d 1054 
(9th Cir. 2002), Local 3 contends that the inquiry is whether the employer’s 
honest belief in the employee’s misconduct was the reason for the employee’s 
termination.  This reliance is misplaced because there is a genuine issue of 
material fact as to whether Local 3 honestly believed its reasons for 
terminating Nozawa.  See Lales, 133 Hawai i at 358, 328 P.3d at 367 (holding 
that the defendants’ reliance on Villiarimo  was unpersuasive because there 
was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the employer honestly 
believed its reasons for its actions).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
34 Inc., 109 Hawai i 69, 72, 123 P.3d 194, 197 (2005)).  
Accordingly, the circuit court erred in granting summary 
judgment in favor of Local 3.   
IV. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s July 28, 2017 
Judgment on Appeal, the circuit court’s October 18, 2013 final 
judgment, the circuit court’s order granting the motion for 
summary judgment, and the December 4, 2013 order denying 
Nozawa’s motion for reconsideration are vacated, and the case is 
remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.   
Charles H. Brower  and 
Michael Healy  
for petitioner  
 
Ashley K. Ikeda  and 
David A. Rosenfeld  
for respondent  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
