 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-10-0000102 04-DEC-2015 09:47 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
---oOo---
NORMAN SAMSON and FRANCINE SAMSON, Individually,
 
and as Guardians Prochein Ami of KU‘ ULEILANI SAMSON, a Minor
 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
NOLA ANN NAHULU,
 
Respondent/Defendant-Appellee.
 
SCWC-10-0000102
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-10-0000102; CIVIL NO.  08-1-0171-01)  
 
DECEMBER 4, 2015  
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, MCKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ  . 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.

 
I. Introduction 
This appeal arises from 
a motor vehicle-pedestrian accident 
in which a vehicle operated by Respondent-Defendent-Appellee 
Nola Ann Nahulu (“Nahulu”) struck a minor (“Minor”) as she 
crossed Farrington Highway on foot. At trial, the parties 
disputed Nahulu’s speed and whether Minor was in a crosswalk at 
1  
 
  Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants Norman Samson and 
Francine Samson (hereinafter “the Samsons”), individually and as 
guardians prochein ami of their daughter, Minor, challenge (1) 
specific jury instruct  ions, (2) the instructions   as a whole,  
which allegedly misstated the   standard of care in automobile-
pedestrian collisions, (3) the exclusion of certain testimony  
about Nahulu’s speed, and (4)  the exclusion of a photograph with 
markings made or authorized by a witness during his deposition 
   
  
                         
   
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the time she was hit.   A jury returned a unanimous special 
verdict finding Nahulu not negligent.  
that placed Minor in a crosswalk
.1 The ICA affirmed the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit’s ( circuit court) judgment. 
1 The Samsons present the following questions on certiorari: 
1.	 Did the ICA grievously err in affirming the verdict 
in favor of an SUV driver where erroneous 
instructions, taken as a whole, gave the wrongful impression that a pedestrian must strictly adhere to 
traffic rules or forfeit the right to any recovery 
from a negligent driver who injures the pedestrian. 
2.	 Did the ICA grievously err in holding that, although the lower court erroneously excluded eyewitness 
testimony that Nahulu was “trave ling at an unsafe 
speed,” the error was nevertheless harmless. 
3.	 Did the ICA grievously err in excluding from evidence 
a copy of another photograph already in evidence on 
which a key eyewitness confirmed a marking on the 
photograph showing [Minor’s] lo cation at the time 
Nahulu hit her (which was within the crosswalk), 
based on an erroneous objection to and erroneous 
finding of unfair prejudice. 
4.	 Did the ICA grievously err in holding that an instruction that is vague, incomplete and 
grammatically in correct concerning Nahulu’s duty of 
care, and therefore presumptively harmful, did not 
(continued. . .) 
2  
 
  In this case, the jury instructions erroneously focused on 
a pedestrian’s obligation to obey all traffic laws rather than a 
driver’s obligation to avoid collisions . Instruction No. 6 (as 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                               
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
modified) quotes from  State v. Arena, 46 Haw. 315, 379 P.2d 594 
(1963). That case was premised on the existence of contributory 
negligence, which was eliminated by the passage of Hawaii’s 
comparative fault statute, Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS)  § 663-
31 (1993). Instruction No. 6 (as modified) incorrectly 
suggested that a driver need n  ot look out for pedestrians 
violating the law and that civil recovery is not available to a contributorily negligent plaintiff.   The giving of the 
instruction constitutes prejudicial error necessitating a new 
trial. In addition, the instructions as a whole were  
prejudicially erroneous.  
We hold as follows: 
(1) Instruction No. 6 (as modified) is 
erroneous as a matter of law; (2) Arena is overruled to the 
extent that it is contrary to HRS § 291C-74 (2007) and gives the 
incorrect impression that a pedestrian forfeits a right to 
recover from a negligent driver if he or she does not strictly adhere to traffic rules; (3) the jury instructions as a whole 
misstated the law by improperly focusing on a pedestrian’s 
(. . .continued)  
require reversal because the ICA concluded that the 
Samsons failed to show that the faulty instruction 
had a detrimental effect on them. 
3  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
duties to obey all traffic laws and were prejudicially 
erroneous; (4) the circuit court erred in excluding certain 
testimony on Nahulu’s speed; and (5) the circuit court erred in 
excluding the photograph with markings made or authorized by the 
witness during his deposition.   
Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s May 2, 2014 Judgment on 
Appeal, entered pursuant to its March 31, 2014 Memorandum 
Opinion, which affirmed the circuit court’s August 9, 2010 
Judgment and September 29, 2010 Order Denying Plaintiffs’ Motion 
for Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict and/or, In the 
Alternative, for New Trial (“JNOV motion”),2 and remand the case 
to the circuit court for a new trial and further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
II. Background 
A. General Factual Background 
On July 4, 2005, Nahulu’s Honolulu -bound SUV struck Minor 
in or near a crosswalk as she crossed Farrington Highway near 
the Jade Street intersection. Prior to the collision, Minor had 
waited with her friend at a bus stop on the Honolulu-bound side 
of the road.  There is a bus cutout located on the outside of 
the Honolulu-bound lane for buses to service passengers.  At the 
2 The Samsons titled the filing as a JNOV instead of as a judgment 
as a matter of law (JMOL) as provided under Hawai ʻi Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 50. 
4  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                         
  
   
 
    
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
time of the accident, two buses had pulled into the cutout.  The 
first bus operated by McKenna Benson (“Benson”) was forty feet 
long and the second bus was sixty feet long. 
As she approached the intersection from behind the bus 
cutout in the Honolulu-bound direction, Nahulu saw one bus pull 
into the bus cutout and began to decelerate.  After Benson 
pulled his bus all the way into the cutout, he looked in his 
side view mirror to ensure that he had provided enough space for 
the second bus to pull in. From his perspective, both of the 
buses appeared as “one long bus” with no part o f either bus 
blocking the lane of traffic; however, he could not recall whether the buses were completely off or partially on the road.  
Arthur Joao (“Mr. Joao”),
3 the driver of a pickup truck following 
behind Nahulu’s SUV, and his wife Betty Joao (“Mrs. Joao”), his 
passenger, stated that the bus was not completely off the road, 
but did not impede the flow of traffic.4 
3 We note that the reading of Mr. Joao’s deposition designations 
was not transcribed by the court reporter as required by Roxas v. Marcos , 89 
Hawai
‘i 91, 100 n.2, 969 P.2d 1209, 1218 n.2 (1998), which states that “in 
future cases in general, the circuit courts should require that any 
deposition testimony read into evidence . . . be transcribed by the court reporter as if it were live testimony.” See also HRS § 602-
4 (1993) (“The 
supreme court shall have the general superintendence of all courts of inferior jurisdiction to prevent and correct errors and abuses therein where 
no other remedy is expressly provided by law.” ). 
4 During his deposition, Mr. Joao changed his previous statement 
made to an insurance agent.  He had initially stated that the cars had to 
cross over into the opposing lane to pass the bus because the back of the bus had been sticking out four to five feet into the road.  Mr. Joao clarified 
that “the bus was almost completely off the road.” 
5  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
                         
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
According to Mrs. Joao, after the buses pulled over, the 
SUV and the Joaos’ truck gradually sped up. Nahulu stated that 
she had not seen anyone in front of the bus nor had she crossed 
the double solid line prior to impact. Mrs. Joao stated that 
she did not see anyone in the crosswalk, but could not remember 
where the crosswalk was located. 
Minor’s friend was the last person to board Benson’s bus.  
According to Benson, who had an unobstructed view through the front windows of his bus, Minor said goodbye to her friend as 
she stood near the right front corner of the bumper with her 
hand on the bus. 
Minor testified that she looked both ways before entering a 
crosswalk in front of the bus; other witnesses provided 
conflicting testimony. Nahulu testified that Minor entered the 
road quickly from right in front of the bus without looking, 
walked diagonally across the road, and was not in a crosswalk 
when she was hit.
5 Mrs. Joao stated that “[Minor] was looking 
back over her shoulder towards the bus” as she entered the road 
close to the front of the bus outside of a crosswalk, but could 
not remember which side of the crosswalk Minor was on.  Mr. Joao 
stated that “the bus was still moving ” when Minor entered the 
5 At trial, Nahulu testified that she had “mixed up” the placement 
of her car and Minor during her deposition. During her deposition, she had 
placed Minor in the crosswalk.  At trial, Nahulu asserted that she ended up 
in the crosswalk, while Minor ended up on the Waianae side of the crosswalk. 
6  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
road, looking over her shoulder and yelling as she ran.  Benson 
stated that Minor remained near the front of his stationary bus 
as she moved diagonally toward the intersection at a brisk pace.  
He saw Nahulu’s SUV approaching in his side view mirror near the 
left rear tire of his bus, and waved his arm out of the window and yelled in an attempt to stop the SUV. According to Paul Day 
(“Day”), the driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection in 
the opposing lane of traffic, Nahulu was “coming around the bus 
at a good speed[.]” 
The witnesses provided conflicting testimony regarding 
Minor’s location at the point of impact. Benson estimated th at 
Minor traveled approximately six to eight feet from the front of 
the bus before she and the SUV collided in the middle of the 
Honolulu-bound lane. Day testified that Minor was hit by 
Nahulu’s SUV when she made her way to the driver’s corner of the 
bus. Mr. Joao could not recall whether Minor was in or out of 
the crosswalk. Mrs. Joao stated that “[Minor] was over the 
yellow line [in the opposing lane of traffic] when she ran 
in[to] the [SUV].” 
By Benson’s account, Minor “jumped a little bit” right 
before the SUV hit her, the SUV made contact, “then [he] heard 
skidding of the breaks[,]” and Minor was sent approximately 
twenty feet, bouncing or skipping on the pavement, until she 
finally came to rest in the middle of the Honolulu-bound lane.  
7  
 
   
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mrs. Joao stated that Minor flew back towards the direction she 
came from, landing partially in front of the Joaos’ truck. Day 
stated that the collision “was a different kind of hit” that 
caused Minor to “slingshot up into the air ” diagonally toward 
the middle line dividing the lanes rather than forward.  He testified that Minor was hit on the passenger side of the SUV, 
which “was going at a speed where it couldn’t stop in time[,]” 
and skidded “at least eight feet” after the impact before coming 
to rest in the crosswalk. He estimated that Minor flew between fifteen to twenty feet and fell diagonally, “almost straight 
down[,]” before landing “really hard” and sliding approximately 
one to two feet before coming to stop “in the middle of what would have been the divider[.]” 
Neither Benson nor the Joaos saw Nahulu’s SUV attempt to 
stop or veer to the left prior to the collision; Nahulu stated 
that after the impact, she veered to the left over the double 
solid line and came to a stop in the crosswalk. Mrs. Joao testified that the SUV swerved to the left a few feet from the 
front of the bus as soon as Minor entered the road and “stopped 
almost simultaneously” in the intersection, just past the bus, 
in the oncoming lane of traffic. Benson estimated that Nahulu’s 
8  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
  
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
SUV skidded approximately forty feet and came to rest about ten 
6feet from Minor.
Minor alleged severe physical injuries and psychological 
harm as a result of the accident. 
B.	 Circuit Court Proceedings7 
On January 25, 2008, the Samsons filed a complaint in 
circuit court against Nahulu, alleging negligence, negligent 
infliction of emotional distress, and loss of consortium. 
1.	 Motions in Limine Excluding Eyewitness Testimony on 
Speed 
The parties filed various motions in limine, contesting the 
admissibility of certain eyewitness testimony and evidence.  
Relevant motions include (1) Nahulu’s Motion in Limine No. 5 to 
Exclude Any and All Questions to and Testimony by Lay Witnesses 
Concerning the Ultimate Issue of Defendant’s Alleged Negligence 
(Motion in Limine No. 5), and (2) Nahulu’s Motion in Limine No. 
6 to Limit Testimony of Lay Witnesses to Personal Knowledge 
(Motion in Limine No. 6). 
In Motion in Limine No. 5, Nahulu moved to preclude the 
Samsons from eliciting lay witness testimony on legal 
conclusions at trial, i.e., that Nahulu was going “too fast[,]” 
6 At a pre- trial deposition, Benson testified that Nahulu’s SUV 
skidded forty feet after the impact; [85:26], however, he clarified at trial 
that Nahulu’s SUV skidded and came to stop approximately ten feet from where 
Minor ended up. 
7 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
9  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contending that lay opinions on liability are of no probative 
value and should be excluded under Hawai ʻi Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 403. The Samsons argued that relevant lay opinion 
testimony bearing on ultimate issues is not precluded under HRE 
Rule 701, and that factual questions about conditions and speed, 
from which inferences may be drawn, are permitted. The circuit 
court granted Nahulu’s motion and precluded testimony that 
Nahulu was driving “too fast for the conditions” because “it 
calls in part for a legal conclusi on and it’s tantamount to 
testimony opinion that [Nahulu] was negligent.” 
In Motion in Limine No. 6, Nahulu moved to limit lay 
witness testimony to personal observations and preclude lay 
opinions about Nahulu’s compliance with traffic laws, including 
testimony that she was driving “too fast,” pursuant to HRE Rule 
403. The Samsons argued under  HRE Rule 403 that the evidence 
was more probative than unduly prejudicial.   The court granted 
and denied the motion in part, precluding speculative testimony 
about Nahulu’s thoughts and violation of traffic laws, while 
permitting testimony on personal observations.  
2.	 Exclusion of Exhibit 7 and Related Testimony Placing 
Minor in a Crosswalk 
During trial, the court excused the jurors to hold an HRE 
Rule 104 hearing on the admissibility of Exhibit 7 and related 
testimony from Benson, the driver of the first bus stopped at 
10  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the Jade street bus stop in the bus cutout.  Exhibit 7 was a 
photograph of the accident scene that had markings made or 
authorized by Benson at his deposition, which depicted the point 
of impact in the middle of a crosswalk on Farrington Highway and 
the front of his bus in relation to the stop line . At the 
hearing, Benson confirmed that he had drawn the “X” showing the 
location of the front of his bus, but testified that someone 
else had drawn an “X” i n the area he had indicated as the point 
of impact during his deposition. He admitted, however, that 
although he could not remember during the deposition or the 
hearing whether a marked crosswalk existed at the time, he had 
testified in his deposition that Minor had been struck in the 
area of the second “X.” 
Thus, at the HRE Rule 104 hearing, Benson could not recall 
whether the accident occurred in a crosswalk nor whether Exhibit 
7 accurately depicted the area at the time of the accident. 
Several witnesses, including Nahulu, had testified that the crosswalk existed at the time of the collision. In addition, 
the same photograph showing the crosswalk without Benson’s marks 
had already been admitted into evidence as the Samsons’ Exhibit 
3-B without objection. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the court excluded 
Exhibit 7 on the grounds that its admission would be unduly 
prejudicial because the photograph depicted the collision 
11  
 
  
  
 
 
                         
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
occurring in the crosswalk despite  Benson’s inability to 
remember a crosswalk at the scene or verify the accuracy of the  
photograph.   The court noted that nothing prevented the Samsons 
from using a different photograph and Benson’s testimony to 
establish the point of impact based on his personal knowledge.   
In addition, the court rejected the Sams ons’ proposal for a 
limiting instruction because it feared the jury could not ignore 
the fact that Exhibit 7 indicated the point of impact in the 
crosswalk.  
3. Jury Instructions 
At issue on certiorari are the Samsons’ requested 
Instruction No. 12, which was refused, and Nahulu’s requested 
Instructions Nos. 
1 and 2, which were given, as well as Nahulu’s 
requested Instruction No. 6, which was given as modified.  In addition, the Samsons raise issues regarding the instructions as 
8a whole.
8 In settling jury instructions, trial courts must comply with HRCP 
Rule 51(c) (2000), which states, in relevant part, as follows: 
Whenever the court refuses to give any requested 
instruction, the court shall write the word “refused” in 
the margin thereof. Whenever the court approves any 
requested instruction, the court shall write the word 
“given” in the margin thereof. Whenever the court modifies 
any requested instruction, the court shall mark the same in 
such manner that it shall distinctly appear what part is refused and what part is given. Instructions to which no 
objection is made shall be marked “given by agreement” and 
no later objection thereto may be made or allowed. 
HRCP Rule 51(d) further provides, in relevant part: 
(continued. . .) 
12  
 
       
 
 
 
      
  
  
 
  
                                                                               
 
 
    
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
a. The Samsons’ Requested Instruction No. 12 
The Samsons’ requested Instruction No. 12, which was 
refused, provided as follows: “The duty to use reasonable care 
does not require the same amount of caution from drivers and 
pedestrians. While drivers and pedestrians must be aware that 
motor vehicles can cause serious injuries, drivers must use more 
care to avoid collisions than pedestrians.” 
b. Nahulu’s Requested Instruction No. 1 
Nahulu’s requested Instruction No. 1, which was given over 
objection, stated “[a] pedestrian is required to obey all 
traffic laws which are applicable to her.” 
The Samsons objected on the basis that the requested 
instruction misstates HRS § 291C-71 (2007)9 and “unduly 
(. . .continued)  
Any revision made and any instructions prepared by the 
court pursuant to the foregoing provisions shall be reduced 
by the court to writing, and counsel shall be entitled to 
be heard thereon. The court shall inform counsel of its 
proposed action with respect to any such revision made or instructions prepared by the court, and any changes therein 
made by the court shall be reduced to writing and submitted 
to counsel prior to their arguments to the jury. 
In this case, the circuit court did not memorialize its rulings on the parties’ requested instructions in writing as required by HRCP Rule 51. 
Accordingly, the circuit court’s actions and m odifications to the requested 
instructions were derived 
from the trial transcrip t.  
9 HRS § 291C-71 provides as follows: 
(a) A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any 
official traffic -control device specifically applicable to 
the pedestrian, unless otherwise directed by a police 
officer. 
(continued. . .) 
13  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
                                                                               
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
highlights only the responsibilities of the plaintiff” 
pedestrian to obey the law, as opposed to the defendant driver’s 
similar obligation. The circuit court gave the instruction over 
the Samsons’ objection because “the substance of the inst ruction 
appears to be correct ” and the court believed the instruction 
would assist the jury. 
c. Nahulu’s Requested Instruction No. 2 
Nahulu’s requested Instruction 2, which was given, stated 
“[a] pedestrian who crosses a roadway outside of a crosswalk is 
required to yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the 
roadway.” 
The Samsons objected on the basis that the requested 
instruction directly conflicts with HRS § 291C-73(a) (2007), 
which provides, in relevant part, “ [e]very pedestrian crossing a 
roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or 
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the 
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.” The Samsons 
argued that the instruction (1) does not explain that a 
pedestrian crossing in an unmarked crosswalk has the right-of-
(. . .continued) 
(b) Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and 
pedestrian- control signals as provided in sections 291C -32 
and 291C- 33. 
(c) At all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the 
privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated 
in this chapter. 
14  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
way, and (2) refers to all vehicles upon a roadway, yet is 
inconsistent with other instructions given with respect to the 
duties of a motorist (i.e., that a motorist cannot rely upon a 
right-of-way gained as a result of excessive speed, negligence, 
or statutory violation).  Upon consideration of HRS § 291C -
73(a), the context within which the instruction was to be given, and another instruction taken from Arena (Instruction No. 6 as 
modified), discussed below, that purportedly addressed the 
Samsons’ points, the court gave the instruction over the 
Samsons’ objection on the grounds that it was nei ther incorrect 
nor misleading. 
d.	 Nahulu’s Requested Instruction No. 6 (as 
modified) 
Nahulu’s requested Instruction No. 6 stated “[a] person 
traveling upon a highway has a right to assume that all other persons will obey the law and is not required to keep a lookout 
for others who violate the law. ” 
The Samsons objected on the grounds that the requested 
instruction misstates the law because it omits a portion of the 
quotation from Arena and states that no one is required to keep 
a lookout for others. The circuit court gave a modified version 
of Nahulu’s requested Instruction No. 6 by quoting a portion of 
Arena allegedly “in its entirety.” 
Instruction No. 6 (as modified) provided: 
15  
 
  A person traveling upon a highway has a right to 
assume that all other persons using the highway will obey 
the law and that one is not bound to keep a lookout for 
others who may violate the law applies only to those cases 
where the automobile is being driven in conformity to the 
law and not in violation thereof, and it has no application where the automobile is being driven in a negligent manner. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
However, this instruction incompletely quoted Arena. See  46 
Haw. at 331, 379 P.2d at 604. 
The quotation from Arena actually 
reads: 
The rule that  a person traveling upon a highway has a right 
to assume that all other persons using the highway will 
obey the law and that one is not bound to keep a lookout 
for others who may violate the law applies only to those cases where the automobile is being driven in conformity to 
the law and not in violation thereof, and it has no 
application where the automobile  is being driven in a 
negligent manner, where it is not properly equipped with 
lights, or where it is being driven at an excessive rate of 
speed. In those instances the primary negligence of the 
driver of the automobile renders inoperative the rule 
stated.
  
Id. (quoting Cushing Ref. & Gasoline Co. v. Deshan  , 300 P. 312, 
317 (Okla. 1931)) (emphasis added). 
The Samsons conceded that the court’s modification 
addressed their first concern “to a certain extent[,]” but 
maintained their objection. 
4. Verdict 
On June 10, 2010, the jury returned a unanimous special 
verdict in favor of Nahulu, finding that she was not negligent. 
On August 9, 2010, the circuit court entered its Judgment in 
favor of Nahulu. 
On August 11, 2010, the Samsons filed their 
JNOV motion. On September 29, 2010, the circuit court entered 
its order denying the Samsons’ JNOV motion. 
16  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
III. Appeal to the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
On appeal, the Samsons raised issues concerning, inter 
alia, specific instructions, the jury instructions as a whole, 
and certain evidentiary rulings. Regarding the jury 
instructions, the Samsons argued that Nahulu’s proposed 
instructions were erroneous articulations of the law and 
unwarranted by the evidence. In particular, the Samsons argued 
that (1) Instructions Nos. 1 and 2 omitted a driver’s duty of 
care to avoid pedestrians upon a roadway and prejudicially 
suggested that a pedestrian’s violation of any traffic law 
constituted negligence per se or a complete bar to recovery; (2) Instruction No. 6 (as modified) misquoted a judicial opinion, 
misapplied judicial precedent, improperly assigned a “right” 
that confused the jury in determining negligence, did not apply to vehicle-pedestrian accidents, and was precluded by HRS § 
291C-74; and (3) the circuit court improperly failed to give the 
Samsons’ proposed I nstruction No. 12, which they contend 
correctly stated that drivers must exercise greater care to 
avoid collisions than pedestrians. With respect to the 
evidentiary rulings, the Samsons argued that the circuit court 
abused its discretion when it granted Nahulu’s motions in limine 
barring Day’s deposition testimony that Nahulu was going at an 
“unsafe speed”, and excluded Exhibit 7 and related testimony from Benson and refused to give a limiting instruction. 
17  
 
  Nahulu asserted that the jury instructions, as a whole, 
were accurate and warranted by the evidence adduced at trial, 
and that the Samsons’ proposed Instruction  No. 12 was prop erly 
excluded because it imposed a higher duty of care on drivers and  
conflicted with other instructions.  Nahulu further argued that 
the circuit court properly excluded Day’s testimony about 
Nahulu’s speed because it amounted to legal conclusions under 
HRE Rule 701 and was prohibited by HRE Rule 403, and Exhibit  7 
due to a lack of foundation.  
 
 
  
                         
  
 
 
 
 
 A motorist must see what is in plain view on the 
roadway.  
 A motorist must maintain a proper lookout straight 
ahead and laterally ahead.  
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The ICA held that “the jury instructions, as a whole, 
[showed that] the circuit court properly instructed the jury on 
a driver’s obligation to drive with due care.”  Samson v. 
Nahulu
, No. CAAP-10-0000102, at 16 (App. Mar. 31, 2014) (mem.).10 
10 The circuit court gave the following additional instructions 
about the duties of care for drivers and pedestrians: 
Samsons’ Instruction No. 8, given as modified over objection: 
The duty to observe ordinary care requires that a 
driver of an automobile must anticipate the possibility of 
meeting pedestrians or other vehicles at street crossings 
and have his or her automobile under such control as may be 
necessary to avoid colliding with a pedestrian on the roadway. 
When necessary, a motorist must give a warning to a 
pedestrian by sounding the horn. 
Consistent with the foregoing, it is the law in 
Hawaii that every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection and when special hazards exist with respect to 
pedestrians or other traffic, regardless of the posted 
speed. 
(continued. . .) 
18  
 
                                                                                
 
 
 
 Hawaii law requires that every driver of a vehicle 
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any 
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by 
sounding the driver’s horn when necessary and shall 
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.  
 Hawaii law requires that a driver of a vehicle shall 
stop for a pedestrian who is crossing a roadway within a marked crosswalk when the pedestrian is on the half of the 
roadway on which  the vehicle is traveling.  
 The driver shall not proceed until the pedestrian has 
passed the vehicle and the driver can thereafter proceed safely ahead.  
 A pedestrian who is using a marked crosswalk has the 
right to assume that an oncoming motorist will obey this 
law and yield to the pedestrian’s right of way.  
 However, a pedestrian may not suddenly leave a curb 
or other place of safety and walk into the path of an oncoming vehicle such that it is impossible for a driver to 
yield.  
 If you find that the law was violated, you may 
consider this violation with all the other evidence in this case in deciding the issue of negligence.  
 
 It is the law in Hawaii that whenever any vehicle is 
stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk 
at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from 
the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.  
 
 The driver of a motor vehicle may not rely upon the 
right-of-way gained as a result of excessive speed or by 
other negligent act or violation of the law.  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(. . .continued)  
A motorist’s failure to observe these requirements 
that results in a collision with a pedestrian is 
negligence. 
Samsons’ Instruction No. 6, given over objection: 
Samsons’ Instruction No. 4 combined with Nahulu’s Instruction No. 5, given as 
modified over objection:  
Samsons’ Instruction No. 5, given over objection: 
Samsons’ Instruction No. 10, given over objection: 
Samsons’ Instruction No. 3, given over objection: 
It is the law in Hawaii that yellow lines indicate the  
separation of lanes of traffic flowing in opposing directions or 
the left boundary of a traffic lane at a particularly hazardous 
location.  
Double lines indicate maximum restriction.  
(continued. 
. .) 
19  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
                                                                               
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
With regard to challenges to specific instructions, the ICA held 
that Instructions Nos. 1, 2, and 6 did not amount to reversible 
error. Samson, mem. op. at 19. The ICA concluded that 
Instructions Nos. 1 and 2 were accurate reflections of the law, specifically HRS §§ 291C-71 and -73, respectively. Samson, mem. 
op. at 15-16.  The ICA also acknowledged that Instruction No. 6 was “grammatically incorrect” and that a portion of the quote 
was “inadvertently left out[,]” but nonetheless concluded that 
the instruction was not erroneous because (1) both HRS § 291C-74 
and Instruction No. 6 provide that a driver must exercise due 
care, (2) Instruction No. 6 would have accurately reflected the 
law as set forth in Arena “if properly quoted,” (3) the 
quotation from Arena is applicable to vehicle-pedestrian 
collisions because pedestrians are expected to follow the rules 
of the road and fall within the statutory definition of 
“traffic[,]” and (4) one of the Samsons’ instructions given to 
the jury was likewise based on Arena. Samson, mem. op. at 18-
19.   The ICA further concluded that “the grammatical error was 
not prejudicial to the Samsons” because the vagueness worked to Nahulu’s detriment and the Samsons’ burden to prove Nahulu’s 
(. . .continued)  
A double solid yellow line is used to indicate the 
separation between lan
es of traffic moving in opposite 
directions.  
The crossing of a double solid yellow line by vehicular 
traffic is prohibited except when the crossing is part of a left 
turn movement. 
20  
 
  
 
 
     
 
  
  
 
   
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
negligence at trial remained the same.   Samson, mem. op. at 18.  
The ICA also concluded that the circuit court did not err in 
refusing to give the Samsons’ proposed Instruction No. 12 on the 
basis that “Hawai
‘i law does not support the proposition that, as 
a matter of law, pedestrians can exercise  less caution in their 
actions than drivers.” Samson, mem. op. at 20. 
Regarding evidentiary issues, the ICA concluded that Day’s 
testimony about Nahulu’s speed was admissible under HRE Rule 701, however, the exclusion amounted to harmless error because 
other evidence was presented to the jury relevant to breach of 
duty that Nahulu may have been driving at an unsafe speed 
without using the word “unsafe.” See 
Samson, mem. op. at 8-10. 
In addition, the ICA concluded that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in excluding Exhibit 7 and related 
testimony from Benson under HRE Rule 403, nor in denying the use 
of a limiting instruction, as Benson was not able to provide 
foundation testimony. Samson, mem. op. at 4-6. 
Accordingly, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s August 9, 
2010 Judgment and September 29, 2010 order denying the Samsons’ JNOV motion. Samson, mem. op. at 21. 
IV. Standards of Review 
A. Jury Instructions 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at issue 
on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and 
considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
21  
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
     
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading.  
Erroneous instructions are presumptively 
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it 
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial. 
Tabieros v. Clark Equipment Co. , 85 Hawai ʻi 336, 350, 944 P.2d 
1279, 1293 (1997) (quoting State v. Arceo , 84 Hawai‘ i 1, 11, 928 
P.2d 843, 853 (1996) ). “Jury instructions . . . must be 
considered as a whole. Moreover, a refusal to give an 
instruction that correctly states the law is not in error if 
another expressing a substantially similar principle is given.” 
Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai ʻi 282, 286, 884 P.2d 345, 349 (1994)  
(alteration in original) (quoting State v. Pioneer Mill Co. , 64 
Haw. 168, 180, 637 P.2d 1131, 1140 (1981)). 
B. Evidentiary Rulings 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to 
trial court decisions regarding the admissibility of 
evidence, depending on the requirements of the particular rule of evidence at issue. When 
application of a particular evidentiary rule can 
yield only one correct result, the proper standard 
for appellate review is the right/wrong standard. 
Kealoha v. County of Hawaii ,  74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 
P.2d 670, 676 .  .  . (1993). . . .  
State v. Kupihea ,
 80 Hawai‘ i 307, 314, 909 P.2d 1122, 1129[] 
(1996) . . . . “Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 
403, which require a ‘judgment call’ on the part of the 
trial court, are reviewed for an abuse of discretion.” 
Walsh v. Chan , 80 Hawai
‘i 212, 215, 908 P.2d 1198, 1201[] 
(1995) (citing Sato v. Tawata
, 79 Hawai ‘i 14, 19, 897 P.2d 
941, 946 (1995)). . . . “‘The trial court abuses its 
discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant.’” State v.  
Ganal
, 81 Hawai ‘i 358, 373, 917 P. 2d 370, 385 (1996) 
(quoting State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai ‘i 172, 179, 873 P.2d 
51, 58 (1994)) . 
22  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
     
   
 
                         
  
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Tabieros, 85 Hawaiʻ i at 350-51, 944 P.2d at 1293-94 (quoting 
Arceo, 84 Hawaiʻ i at 11, 928 P.2d at 853), quoted in Estate of 
Klink ex rel. Klink v. State , 113 Hawai ‘i 332, 351-52, 152 P.3d 
504, 523-24 (2007). 
V. Discussion 
A.	 The ICA erred in determining that the jury instructions 
were not prejudicially erroneous or misleading 
The Samsons argue that the ICA “grievously erred ” in 
affirming the verdict where erroneous instructions given, 
specifically Nahulu’s Instructions Nos. 1, 2, and 6, improperly 
instructed the jury that (1) a driver need not anticipate pedestrians who are not strictly following the law, and (2) 
Minor forfeited her right to recover from a negligent driver if she violated any traffic rules. (citing Steigman v. Outrigger 
Enter., Inc., 126 Hawai ʻi 133, 145, 267 P.3d 1238, 1250 (2011)). 
1.	 Alleged Error in Specific Instructions a.	 Instruction No. 6 (as modified)
11 
Instruction No. 6 (as modified) is problematic: 
A person traveling upon a highway has a right to 
assume that all other persons using the highway will obey 
the law and that one is not bound to keep a lookout for others who may violate the law applies only to those cases 
where the automobile is being driven in conformity to the 
11 Nahulu’s counsel conceded during oral argument that Instruction 
No. 6 (as modified) is garbled, and failed to respond in the briefs to the Samsons’ assertion that Instruction No. 6 (as modified) was erroneous.  Oral 
Argument at 23:48, Samson v. Nahulu, 133 Hawai ‘i 451 (No. 10 -102), 
available
 
at 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/oasc_scwc10_102.h 
tml.  
23  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
                         
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
law and not in violation thereof, and it has no application 
where the automobile is being driven in a negligent manner.  
The instruction is grammatically incorrect and confusing.  As 
noted, the portion from Arena actually begins this quotation 
with “The rule that . . . .” 
46 Haw. at 331, 379 P.2d at 604. 
Also, the instruction omitted the tail end of the quotation 
pertaining to instances in which a driver’s primary negligence 
renders the rule inoperative. Id. A variation of the omitted 
portion of the quotation was given as a separate instruction, which stated that “[t]he driver of a motor vehicle may not rely upon the right-of-way gained as a result of excessive speed or 
by other negligent act or violation of the law.” The ICA 
concluded that “if properly quoted, the instruction would have accurately reflected the law as set forth in Arena.” Samson, 
mem. op. at 18. However, Arena and Instruction No. 6 (as 
modified) are erroneous iterations of the law.  They misstate a 
driver’s duty of care and conflict with our comparative negligence statute, HRS § 663-31,
12 which was enacted post-Arena 
12 HRS § 663- 31(a) (1993) provides as follows: 
Contributory negligence shall not bar recovery in any 
action by any person or the person ’s legal representative 
to recover damages for negligence resulting in death or in 
injury to person or property, if such negligence was not 
greater than the negligence of the person or in the case of 
more than one person, the aggregate negligence of such 
persons against whom recovery is sought, but any damages 
allowed shall be diminished in proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the person for whose injury, 
damage or death recovery is made. 
24  
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in 1969. As Arena noted, a right-of-way provided under the 
state traffic code “is not absolute and cannot be exercised with 
impunity under all c ircumstances.” 46 Haw. at 316, 379 P.2d at 
597. 	As this court has explained previously,  
[t]he mere fact that the operator of a motor vehicle [has 
the right- of-way] does not in and of itself give such 
operator the right to proceed across the intersection  in 
any event; [] where it becomes an issue of fact for a jury to determine whether or not in approaching or proceeding 
across an intersecting highway the operator of the motor 
vehicle[,] in the exercise of due care, might have avoided 
a collision and resultant injuries, an[] instruction to the 
effect that irrespective of the existing conditions such 
operator has a right to proceed across the intersection is 
erroneous
. 
Mossman v. Sherman, 34 Haw. 477, 481 (Terr. 1938) (quoting 
McCombs v. Ellsberry
, 85 S.W.2d 135, 140 (Mo. 1935)).  
Therefore, a driver exercising a right-of-way may still be 
determined to have been negligent under the attendant 
circumstances. Applying this precedent, Nahulu was required to 
exercise due care to avoid collisions even if she had  the right-
of-way and did not violate any traffic laws, and even if Minor violated pedestrian traffic laws. Instruction No. 6 (as 
modified) incorrectly stated otherwise.   
The Samsons argue that the ICA misstated the standard of  
review for erroneous instruc  tions when it concluded that 
Instruction No. 6 (as modified)  “did not require reversal 
because the Samsons ‘failed to show the instruction had any detrimental effect on them.” The Samsons further argue that the 
ICA’s rationalization that the instruction’s  vagueness worked to 
25  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Nahulu’s detriment “do[es] not amount to an affirmative showing 
that the erroneous instruction did not result in prejudice when 
reviewing the record as a whole, and thus [the ICA’s] decision 
to affirm in spite of the improper instruction was grievous 
error[.]”  
Nahulu argues that the Samsons misconstrue the ICA ’s 
Memorandum Opinion in that the ICA correctly found that 
Instruction No. 6 (as modified) 
was not erroneous, and thus, the 
Samsons are not entitled to any finding that the instruction was 
“presumptively harmful” given that the record and totality of 
instructions given are “devoid of prejudice[.]” 
Instruction No. 6 (as modified) was erroneous as a matter 
of law. Arena 
was a criminal negligent homicide case in which 
this court held that the driver of a speeding car who killed the driver of a car exiting a private driveway did not have a 
“right” to assume that others would obey the law . 46 Haw. at 
328, 379 P.2d at 603. In other words, the speeding driver was 
not shielded from criminal liability by having the right-of-way.  
The rule stated in Arena no longer applies because it was 
premised on the existence of contributory negligence, which was 
eliminated by the passage of Hawaii’s comparative fault statute, 
HRS § 663-31.  See 46 Haw. at 331, 379 P.2d at 604 (quoting 
Cushing
, 300 P. at 317) (discussing contributory negligence); 
Steigman , 126 Hawai ʻi at 135, 267 P.3d at 1240 (explaining that 
26  
 
  
 
  
 
   
    
 
  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HRS § 663-61(a) “eliminates contributory negligence”). 
Moreover, such a rule “conflicts with the intent of the 
Legislature that the courts apply comparative negligence in the 
place of ‘unfair’ common law doctrines.” 126 Hawai ʻi at 139, 267 
P.3d at 1244. 
In addition, Instruction 
No. 6 (as modified) directly 
conflicts with a driver’s obligation to e xercise due care to 
avoid colliding with pedestrians under HRS § 291C-74.  Even 
without HRS § 291C-74, common sense and general negligence 
principles require a reasonable driver to look out for 
pedestrians given the foreseeable range of danger and gravity of 
possible harm. Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel , 69 Haw. 376, 
388, 742 P.2d 377,  385 ( “As the gravity of the possible harm 
increases, the apparent likelihood of its occurrence need be correspondingly less to generate a duty of precaution.”  (quoting 
W.P. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts  § 31, at 171  
(5th ed. 1984) (footnote omitted)).  Stated differently, all 
drivers have a duty to look for “special hazards” with respect 
to pedestrians or other traffic, and must act reasonably under the circumstances. See 
HRS § 291C-101 (2007). Instruction No. 
6 (as modified) incorrectly suggested that a driver need not look out for pedestrians violating the law and that civil 
recovery is not available to a contributorily negligent 
27  
 
        
 
  
  
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plaintiff. Instruction No. 6 (as modified) was prejudicially 
erroneous. 
We therefore remand this case for a new trial.  To provide 
the circuit court with further guidance on remand, we address 
the other instructions and the evidentiary issues. 
b. Instructions Nos. 1 and 2 
Instruction No. 1 stated “[a] pedestrian is required 
to obey all traffic laws which are applicable to her. ” HRS § 
291C-71 mandates that a pedestrian obey official traffic control devices “specifically applicable to the pedestrian” and “[a]t 
all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges 
and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this 
chapter.” HRS § 291C-71(a), (c).  Instruction No. 1, however, 
does not comport with the language of HRS § 291C-71.  Instruction No. 1 broadened the statutory mandate from traffic 
and pedestrian-control devices to “all traffic laws” and leaves 
the jury guessing as to which laws a pedestrian must follow. 
Therefore, the circuit court’s giving of the instruction was 
erroneous and the ICA erred in concluding that Instruction No. 1 
was supported by HRS § 291C-71. 
Instruction No. 2 similarly tracks the language of HRS § 
291C-73.  Instruction No. 2 stated “[a] pedestrian who crosses a 
roadway outside of a crosswalk is required to yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. ” HRS § 291C-73(a) 
28  
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
      
 
   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
provides, “[e]very pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point 
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked 
crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all 
vehicles upon the roadway.” The parties disputed whether Minor 
was located in a crosswalk at the point of impact based on conflicting eyewitness testimony.  Multiple witnesses, such as 
Nahulu, Benson, and Day, testified that Minor moved diagonally 
as she crossed the street in front of the bus parked at or near 
the stop line. Under the circumstances of this case, 
Instruction No. 2 should not have been given as it implies that 
a person who starts in crosswalk but moves out ever so slightly 
must yield the right-of-way to all vehicles, regardless of the 
circumstances. There are various circumstances that could cause 
a person to step out of a marked crosswalk, including moving out 
of the way of an oncoming vehicle.  Instruction No. 2 suggests 
that such a pedestrian necessarily would be negligent for 
failing to yield the right-of-way.  Instruction No. 2 was an improper categorical statement, and was therefore improperly 
given. 
c. The Samsons’ Requested Instruction No. 12 
The Samsons argue that the ICA erred in rejecting the 
Samsons’ proposed Instruction No. 12 because Hawaiʻ i law 
recognizes that “all persons . . . are also obligated . . . to 
exercise due care or ordinary care, commensurate with the 
29  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
apparent risk[,]” including any imbalance in the parties’ 
capacity to inflict harm. (quoting Kahoʻohanohano v. Dep’t of 
Human Servs., 117 Hawai ʻi 262, 297, 178 P.3d 538, 573 (2008)).  
The Samsons asserted that their “proposed instruc tion 12 was 
wholly proper given the different degree of risk[,]” and 
requested clarification on “the duty of care as betw een 
pedestrians and motorists.” 
Nahulu contends that the Samsons’ argument that motor 
vehicle operators carry a “heightened” duty versu s pedestrians, 
as provided in Instruction  No. 12, is contrary to existing  
Hawaiʻi law and a  pplicable federal decisions.  
The Samsons’ r equested Instruction 
No. 12 provided as 
follows: “The duty to use reasonable care does not require the 
same amount of caution from drivers and pedestrians. While 
drivers and pedestrians must be aware that motor vehicles can 
cause serious injuries, drivers must use more care to avoid 
collisions than pedestria ns.” The Samsons cited Bartlett v. 
Melzo, 88 N.W.2d 518  (Mich. 1958), and  
Baumgartner v. State Farm 
Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. , 356 So.2d 400  (La. 1978), 
superseded by statute , LA. CIV. CODE ANN. art. 2323 (1980) 
(comparative fault), as recognized in  Turner v. New Orleans 
Public Service Inc.  , 476 So.2d 800 (La. 1985), in their 
Application and Opening Brief in support of their argument that 
a driver’s duty of ordinary care requires that a driver exercise 
30  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 The Samsons also argue that the instructions, as a whole, 
gave the “erroneous impression that a driver need not anticipate 
pedestrians who are not strictly following the letter of the 
law, which is inconsistent with Haw aii’s comparative negligence 
law.” Turning to the instructions as a whole, we note that the 
circuit court instructed the jury that: (1) a pedestrian must 
obey all traffic laws (Instruction No. 1), (2) a pedestrian who  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
greater caution than pedestrians. These cases are, however, 
premised entirely on contributory negligence principles.  88 
N.W.2d at 524 (holding that a pedestrian was not guilty of 
contributory negligence as a matter of law); 356 So.2d at 406 
(“a plaintiff’s contributory negligence will not bar his 
recovery”). 
As noted in our discussion, supra, of Instruction No. 6 (as 
modified), Nahulu was required to exercise due care to avoid collisions even if she had the right-of-way and did not violate 
any traffic laws, and even if Minor violated pedestrian traffic 
laws. The Samsons’ proposed Instruction No. 12, however, went 
further and improperly stated that the duty to use reasonable care does not require the same amount of caution from drivers 
and pedestrians. This was an improper statement of the law. 
Thus, the instruction was properly refused. 
2.	 The Instructions as a Whole were Prejudicially 
Erroneous 
31  
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
crosses outside of a crosswalk must yield the right-of-way to 
vehicles (Instruction No. 2), and (3) a person traveling upon a 
highway has a right to assume others will obey the law and is 
not required to keep a lookout for others (Instruction No. 6). 
In addition, the court instructed the ju ry about a driver’s duty 
of ordinary care (Samsons’ Instruction No. 8) in accordance with 
(1)
 Ferrage v. Honolulu Rapid Transit and Land Co. , 24 Haw. 87, 
91 (Terr. 1917) (anticipate possibility of pedestrians), (2) 
Sherry v. Asing, 56 Haw. 135, 143, 531 P.2d 648, 655 (1975) 
(driver’s duty to avoid collisions with pedestrians ), (3) Payne 
v. Sorenson
, 599 P.2d 362, 364 (Mont. 1979) (motorist’s line of 
sight), and (4) HRS § 291C-101 (safe and appropriate speed).  
Further, the court instructed the jury about the rights-of-way 
of pedestrians and drivers in crosswalks under HRS § 291C-72 
(Samsons’ Instruction No. 4 combined with Nahulu’s Instruction 
No. 5), and a driver’s duty to exercise due care to avoid 
colliding with pedestrians in accordance with HRS § 291C-74 (Samsons’ Instruction No. 6) . In addition, the court gave an 
instruction that summarized a different quotation from 
Arena 
regarding limitatio ns to a driver’s right -of-way (Samsons’ 
Instruction No. 10).  See 46 Haw. at 332 , 379 P.2d at 605 (“[A] n 
operator of a motor vehicle cannot arbitrarily rely upon the 
right of way gained as a result of excessive speed or by other 
negligent act or violation of the law. ” (quotation marks and 
32  
 
  
 
 
 Whether there was a violation of a state or city law 
is for you to determine.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
citations omitted)).  Finally, the court also instructed that a 
traffic law violation is evidence of, but is not conclusive of, 
negligence: 
The violation of a state or city law is evidence of 
negligence, but the fact that the law was violated is not 
sufficient, by itself, to establish negligence. The 
violation of the law must be considered along with all the 
other evidence in this case in deciding the issue of 
negligence. 
Although multiple instructions were given describing the 
duties of drivers and pedestrians,13 the instructions, as a 
whole, improperly focused on a pedestrian’s duties  and gave the 
impression that a pedestrian is barred from civil recovery if he 
or she violates any traffic law.    
The jury instructions will need to be revisited 
on remand.  
We now provide further guidance to the circuit court on remand 
regarding the evidentiary issues. 
B.	 The circuit court erroneously excluded Day’s testimony 
about Nahulu’s Speed 
T
he Samsons argue that the ICA “grievously misapplied” the 
“same evidence” rule to find that the circuit court’s wrongful 
exclusion of Day’s “unsafe speed” testimony was harmless error. 
(citing Kekua v. Kaiser Found. Hosp. , 61 Haw. 208, 219, 601 P.2d 
364, 371 (1971)). Specifically, the Samsons argue that the ICA 
could not find that Day’s eyewitness testimony was the same as 
or identical to other evidence presented to the jury. Further, 
13 See supra  note 10. 
33  
 
   
  
 Generally, a witness is permitted to give an opinion on an 
ultimate fact involved in the case, but may not give opinions on 
questions of law as that would amount to legal conclusions. See  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
as the Samsons contend, no other testimony was given concerning 
the “inappropriateness of [Nahulu’s] speed under the 
circumstances to the same degree as [Day’s] excluded 
testimony[.]”   Speed was an important issue and the exclusion 
was clearly prejudicial. The Samsons also request “that any standard for determining whether the exclusion of evidence is 
harmless error [] consider the importance of the evidence to the 
proponent’s case.   (citing 
Adams v. Fuqua Industries, Inc. , 820 
F.2d 271, 273 (8th Cir. 1987)) .  
Nahulu argues that the ICA properly applied Kekua 
to find 
that “Day was able to provide essentially the same evidence 
through his detailed account of his observations” given his 
statements concerning Nahulu’s vehicle and speed as well as 
other witnesses’ testimony relevant to Nahulu’s speed and 
alleged breach of duty, such as Benson’s testimony. 
HRE Rule 704; Create 21 Chuo, Inc. v. Southwest Slopes, Inc. , 81 
Hawaiʻi 512, 522, 918 P.2d 1168, 1178 (App. 1996) (“ [N]onexpert 
opinion that amounts to a conclusion of law cannot be properly received in evidence, since the determination of such questions 
is exclusively within the province of the court[.]”).  
34  
 
  The ICA correctly concluded that the circuit court erred in 
excluding Day’s testimony. Given that Day had personal 
knowledge of the events due to his vantage point, his deposition 
testimony that Nahulu was traveling at an unsafe speed was  
relevant to an ultimate fact, and thus, was admissible.  As the ICA correctly concluded, Day did not testify on any question of  
law, and any issues related to Day’s definition of unsafe could 
have been addressed during cross-examination.   Thus, the circuit 
court erred in excluding this testimony. As we are remanding 
for a new trial based on erroneous instructions, the harmless 
error issue is moot.  
  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
C. Exhibit 7 should have been admitted 
The Samsons argue that the ICA confused 
evidentiary 
sufficiency with unfair prejudice when it affirmed the circuit 
court’s exclusion of Exhibit 7 and Benson’s related testimony on 
point of impact. The Samsons assert that even though the 
evidence was not sufficient standing alone to establish that Minor was in a crosswalk and required a foundation laid by 
others, it was admissible because admitted evidence proved that 
there was a crosswalk at the scene and Benson’s testimony 
rendered Minor’s location in a crosswalk more likely than not . 
Moreover, they contend that the fact that the evidence was 
damaging to Nahulu’s case does not establish unfair prejudice as 
35  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
it did not suggest a decision on an improper basis. (citing HRE 
Rule 403, Commentary). 
Nahulu argues that the ICA correctly found the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion in precluding the evidence 
due to a lack of foundation and consideration of the prejudicial 
effect substantially outweighing its probative value. 
First, with respect to foundation, Exhibit 7 was an exhibit 
to Benson’s deposition. He placed the first “X” on the photograph of the scene, and adopted the placement of the second 
“X.” With the overwhelming testimony of other witnesses as to 
the existence of the marked crosswalk on the date of the accident, proper foundation existed for the admission of Exhibit 
7. 
Second, the circuit court actually excluded Exhibit 7 due 
to its belief that its admission would be unduly prejudicial 
based on Benson’s testimony that he could not recall whether 
there was a marked crosswalk on the day of the accident. This HRE Rule 403 ruling is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. 
Tabieros, 85 Hawaiʻ i at 351, 944 P.2d at 1294. 
Under HRE Rule 4
03, Exhibit 7 should have been admitted 
unless the probative value was substantially outweighed by its 
undue prejudicial effect. “Probative evidence always 
‘prejudices’ the party against whom it is offered since it tends to prove the case against that person.” 
State v. Klafta , 73 
36  
 
  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Haw. 109, 115, 831 P.2d 512, 516 (1992). The commentary to HRE 
Rule 403 explains that “‘[u]nfair prejudice,’ as the Advisory 
Committee’s Note to Fed. R. Evid. Rule  403 explains, ‘means an 
undue tendency to suggest decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional one.’”   HRE Rule 
403, Commentary. In addition, overall considerations in making this determination include the actual need for the evidence, 
availability of other evidence on the same issues, probative 
weight of the evidence, and the potential for creating prejudice 
against the accused in the jurors’ minds. 
State v. Murphy , 59 
Haw. 1, 9, 575 P.2d 448, 455 (1978) (discussed in HRE Rule 403 Commentary). 
The jury, in determining the issue of negligence, was 
entitled to 
know Minor’s location by a key eyewitness to the 
collision. As the Samsons argue, there is nothing inherently prejudicial about a crosswalk that would lead the jury to 
determine negligence upon an improper basis. Further, any potential prejudice could have been cured by a limiting 
instruction. 
The ICA’s reliance on State v. Sequin , 73 Haw. 331, 338, 
822 P.2d 269 (1992), is misguided. In Sequin
, this court upheld 
a trial court’s ruling excluding a photographic exhibit taken six months after the incident because multiple witnesses could 
not verify that it substantially depicted the area at the time 
37  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 Based on the foregoing  analysis, we vacate the ICA’s May 2, 
2014 Judgment on Appeal, entered pursuant to its March 31, 2014 
Memorandum Opinion, which affirmed the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit’s August 9, 2010 Judgment and September 29, 2010 
Order Denying Plaintiffs’ Motion for Judgment Notwithstanding 
the Verdict and/or, In the Alternative, for New Trial, and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings  
consistent with this opinion.  
   
        
   
   
 
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of the alleged offense and there was another diagram admitted 
into evidence that more clearly portrayed the area. In this 
case, Exhibit 7 substantially depicted the area because other 
witnesses, such as Nahulu and Mrs. Joao, were able to provide a 
foundation for a crosswalk at the intersection. In addition, 
the same photograph without the markings was admitted into 
evidence as Exhibit 3-B without objection. 
Any potential prejudicial effect of Exhibit 7 did not 
substantially outweigh its probative value.  Therefore, the circuit court should have admitted the exhibit. 
VI. Conclusion 
Ronald A. Albu  
for petitioners 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Jonathan L. Ortiz and  
Wade J. Katano   
for respondent 
     /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
38 