   
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0001074 11-AUG-2014 
02:15 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
---o0o--
-
SANDRA C.J. BALOGH, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,
  
 
vs. 
 
 
DONALD RAYMOND BALOGH, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee.  
 
SCWC-11-0001074
  
CERTIORARI  TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP
-11-0001074; FC-D NO. 10-1-0149)
 
AUGUST 11, 2014
  
AMENDED CONCURRING AND DISSENTING OPINION BY POLLACK, J.
  
I. Background 
In the period leading up to the 
signing of the 
“agreements” at issue in this case, Sandra Balogh’s (Sandra) and 
Donald Balogh’s (Ray ) marriage was deteriorating. “There was 
constant shouting and screaming. It was an ugly situation with 
1  
 
      
   
 
 
  After months of arguments, Sandra told Ray “ if he were 
serious about being  committed to the marriage, then they should 
‘write something up.’” On October 6, 2008, Sandra dictated to   
Ray the terms of an “agreement”  to save their marriage, which  
Ray handwrote on a single   sheet of blank paper (October 6  
Document).   The October 6 D ocument provided that   if the couple 
separated, Sandra would receive 75% of the proceeds from the 
sale of the couple’s residence, the entire contents of the house 
                                                        
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
    
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
no communication between the parties.”1 Id. Ray was under heavy 
stress as he was unable to control his exhibitionist behavior 
even though he knew it was wrong.2 Ray was also out of work at 
the time of the signing of the “agreements ” in October 2008, 
having just retired a few months earlier. 
1 The quoted statements are from the findings of facts (FOF) of the 
family court and were not contested on appeal. Sandra challenged only two of 
the family court’s FOF. First, Sandra challenged FOF 48, in which the family 
court determined that on August 15, 2009, Sandra told Ray he should leave, 
and Ray reluctantly agreed. Second, Sandra challenged FOF 53, which credited 
Ray’s explanation for the Quitc laim deed: “After discussions with Sandra, Ray 
thought the Quitclaim Deed would protect the home from potential lawsuits, 
but title would be transferred back to joint ownership when thing [s] returned 
to normal.”  The majority concluded that this finding was not clearly 
erroneous, and therefore binding on this court. Majority at 25. 
All of the family court’s remaining FOF are binding on this 
court. See Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawaiʻ i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004) 
(“findings of fact that are not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court” (quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis omitted)). 
Sandra challenged Conclusions of Law N, O, P, Q, R, and S. 
2 Exhibitionism, which involves exposing one’ s genitals to an 
unsuspecting person, falls under the psychiatric sexual disorders category of paraphilias, “any intense and persistent sexual interest other than . . . 
with . . . consenting human partners. ” See American Psychiatric Association, 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 685, 689 (5th ed. 2013) 
available at  http://dsm.psychiatryonline.org/content.aspx?bookid= 
556&sectionid=41101785, http://dsm.psychiatryonline.org/content.aspx?bookid= 
556&sectionid=41101785#103442356 . 
2  
 
       
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                                                        
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
excluding Ray’s tools and clothes, and the  couple’s vehicles.   
“Ray believed that if he did not sign the note, he would lose  
his wife of 30 years and everything they had worked for 
together.”   Ray “was not in his right mind ” when he signed the 
October 6 Document.   The express terms  of the handwritten  
“agreement”  provided  no consideration for Ray’s relinquishment 
3  of half of his interest in their home.  The family court found 
that when Sandra signed the October 6 Document, 
she “was not 
thinking about divorce, she took Ray’s signing as a show of his 
commitment to the marriage.”  
Less than three weeks after th e October 6 Document 
had 
been signed, Sandra and Ray signed a second “agreement,” 
entitled “Memo of Understanding” (MOU). During this two-week 
interval, there was no change in Ray’s emotional state. Indeed, 
the family court’s uncontested finding was that “[t]he parties 
signed the MOU with the intent that they would work on the marriage, especially Ray. Sandra believed Ray would tell her the truth and stop his inappropriate behavior by signing the 
MOU. Ray signed it in his desperate attempt to hold the 
marriage together.” The MOU provided that in the event of a 
divorce, in addition to Sandra receiving the 75% share of the property, contents of the home, and vehicles, Ray was required 
3 The fair market value of the residential property was 1.6 million 
dollars. 
3  
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
    
  
                                                        
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to give Sandra $100,000.00 “in lieu of A limony and court 
proceedings.” There was no consideration stated in the MOU for 
the additional property that Sandra would receive in the event 
of a divorce. 
By August 2009, the marriage had reached its breaking 
point. Ray admitted to Sandra that he was continuing to expose 
himself, and he “reluctantly agreed to move” after Sandra told 
him that “he should leave. ”4 Before leaving, Ray called his 
relatives, and during the call, Sandra overheard Ray say to his sister “maybe divorce.” As a result of overhearing this 
comment, “Sandra got upset and demanded [Ray] s ign over the 
house as security.” Sandra wanted Ray to work on the marriage, 
and Ray agreed to sign a quitclaim deed both to protect the 
asset and to show further commitment to the marriage. As 
“security,” Ray and Sandra executed a deed dated September 1, 
2009, purporting to transfer 100% interest in the property to 
Sandra (Quitclaim Deed).  Sandra conceded in her brief to the ICA that the Quitclaim Deed was one-sided. Sandra believed Ray 
signed the Quitclaim Deed because he was serious about saving 
the marriage. 
Ray stated that he was “not in his right mind when 
[he] signed these documents.” It is uncontested that “[e]ach 
4 As noted, see supra n ote 1, Sandra contested the family court’s 
finding in FOF 48 that she told Ray that he should leave. 
4  
 
    
    
  
   
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
                                                        
     
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
time, Ray believed he could salvage the marriage by signing 
these agreements. He would have signed anything to save their 
thirty-year marriage.  He was in a panic .” (Emphasis added). 
The family court found that Ray also believed the Quitclaim Deed 
was only a temporary agreement that would protect the home from 
potential lawsuits, and the title would eventually transfer back 
to joint ownership.5 
The family court concluded that Ray and Sandra 
were motivated to save their marriage when they signed the 
various agreements. When Ray signed the Quitclaim Deed, Ray was protecting their marital home from potential 
lawsuits and had no intent of permanently transferring his 
interest to Sandra. Neither party intended their marriage 
to result in a divorce and to divide their marital estate 
accordingly. 
Not surprisingly, based upon these uncontroverted 
facts, the family court concluded that all three “agreements ” 
were not enforceable based upon the combined influence of 
numerous stressors that were affecting Ray when the “agreements” 
were signed. The family court concluded that “Ray was suffering 
from extreme distress ” due to: (1) the ongoing construction of 
the Kahala Kua residence; (2) the contractor’s walk -off and 
lawsuit in 2006; (3) the penalties assessed by the couple’s 
homeowner’s association, Association of Owners of Kahala Kua aka 
5 As noted, see supra n ote 1, Sandra contested the family court’s 
finding in FOF 53 that “[a]fter discussions with Sandra, Ray thought the 
Quitclaim Deed would protect the home from potential lawsuits, but title 
would be transferred back to joint ownership when thing[s] returned to 
normal.” 
5  
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
                                                        
      
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Kahala Kua Community Association (AOAO) and the parties’ lawsuit 
against the AOAO; (4) his high security clearance job that also 
required twenty-four hour/seven days on call one week a month; 
(5) the continuing issues with the subcontractors; (6) his 
uncontrollable obsessive behavior that escalated from his 
backyard nudity to public display; (7) his shame and 
embarrassment; (8) his fear of being discovered; and (9) the 
constant argument with Sandra about his inappropriate behavior.  
The tenth reason stated by the family court was that while all 
of the other circumstances were occurring, Sandra suspected Ray 
of infidelity, which further exacerbated the marital 
relationship and escalated the tension and the friction in their 
home. Accordingly, the family court concluded that “Ray was 
thus under duress and coercion when he signed the agreem ents.” 
The family court also concluded that “[a]fter 30 years 
of marriage . . . it would be unconscionable to award Sandra the [home] by enforcing the Quitclaim Deed .” The family court based 
its conclusion of unconscionability on its finding that Ray 
“would in essence receive 0% of the marital estate if” the 
agreements were enforced.
6 
6 As noted, see supra n ote 1, Sandra contested the foregoing 
conclusion of law (COL) of the family court, except that Sandra did not 
challenge the conclusion that Ray would “in essence” receive 0% of the 
marital property if the home were awarded to Sandra, in COL M. 
6  
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
                                                        
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In vacating the family court’s detailed findings and 
analysis, the majority’s decision to uphold the MOU implies that 
a contract between spouses in a deteriorating marriage should be 
evaluated as if the partners were engaging in arm’ s length 
negotiations, without appropriate consideration of the vulnerabilities and unequal power inherent in a breakdown of a 
marriage. By applying a standard used to evaluate contracts in 
a commercial context and requiring Ray to show specific evidence 
of an “improper threat” and the absence of a “reasonable 
alternative” to prove involuntary assent to a contract between marital partners, the majority ’s decision unduly constricts the 
law. Moreover, by not acknowledging the emotional nature of a marriage and its effects on “bargaining” between the spouses, 
the decision creates a precedent that permits an emotionally 
stronger spouse to take advantage of a more vulnerable one. 
II. Discussion 
I would affirm the family court’s determination that 
the Quitclaim Deed was unconscionable and therefore 
unenforceable.
7 Based on the determination that the Quitclaim 
Deed was unenforceable as unconscionable, I would not reach the 
7 I concur with the ultimate r esult of the majority’s holding that 
the “quitclaim deed did not bar the family court from equitably dividing [Ray 
and Sandra’s] property,” Majority at 26, inasmuch as that holding renders the 
Quitclaim D eed as essentially without legal effect, although I would find the 
Quitclaim D eed unenforceable because of unconscionability . I dissent as to 
the majority’s treatment of the remaining two “agreements.” 
7  
 
      
   
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
majority’s conclusion that that Quitclaim Deed did not alter the 
division of property. Majority at 23-24. 
I would also uphold the family court’s implicit 
conclusion that Ray’s assent to the October 6 Document and the 
MOU was involuntary. The fam ily court’s conclusion that the 
agreements were unenforceable is sustained by the family court’s detailed FOFs that were largely uncontested on appeal and firmly 
supported by the record . These uncontested facts provide 
multiple bases to support the family court ’s determination that 
Ray’s assent to the October 6 Document and the MOU was 
involuntary. Further, in line with the approach taken by many 
other states, I would hold that spouses are fiduciaries of each 
other, and therefore contracts between spouses that affect the 
division of property in the event of a divorce should be 
evaluated under that standard. Alternatively, I would hold 
that, as a threshold matter, the October 6 Document and the MOU 
are void for lack of consideration. 
A. The Quitclaim Deed is unconscionable 
A postmarital or separation agreement is enforceable 
if it is not unconscionable and has been voluntarily entered 
into by the parties with knowledge of the financial situation of 
the other spouse. See 
Lewis v. Lewis,  69 Haw. 497, 500-01,  748 
P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988). 
Unconscionability has generally been recognized to include 
an absence of meaningful choice on the part of one of the 
8  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  Here, it is the uncontested COL of the family court 
that Ray “would in essence receive 0% of the marital estate if 
Sandra is awarded [the home].”   Furthermore, Sandra acknowledged 
that enforcing the Quitclaim Deed “ would be  ‘one-sided’  . . . .” 
It is hard to envision  an agreement that is more one -sided than 
an agreement that gives one spouse 100% of the marital estate 
and the other spouse 0%.  The family court correctly concluded 
that:  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
parties together with contract terms which are unreasonably 
favorable to the other party. Whether a meaningful choice 
is present in a particular case can only be determined by 
consideration of all the circumstances surrounding the 
transaction. 
Siopes v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. , 130 Hawaiʻ i 437, 458, 
312 P.3d 869, 890 (2013) (quoting City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. 
Midkiff, 62 Haw. 411, 418, 616 P.2d 213, 218 (1980)).  
Unconscionability typically encompasses two principles: one-
sidedness and unfair surprise. Lewis, 69 Haw. at 502, 748 P.2d 
at 1366.  In the context of postmarital agreements, however, 
one-sidedness alone can render an agreement unconscionable and 
therefore unenforceable. See 
Kuroda v. Kuroda, 87 Hawaiʻ i  419, 
428, 958 P.2d 541, 550 (App. 1998); 
Majority at 29-30. 
It would be unconscionable to award Sandra the [home] by 
enforcing the Quitclaim Deed.  Kuroda v. Kuroda , 87 Hawai ʻi 
419, 958 P.2d 547 (App. 1998); Lewis v. Lewis, 69 Haw. 497, 
748 P.2d 1362 (1988). 
Therefore, the finding of the family court should be affirmed.  
9  
 
   
 
 
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
                                                        
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. The “agreements” are unenforceable because Ray’s assent was 
involuntary. 
Although the family court concluded that Ray was 
“under duress and coercion when he signed the agreements,” the 
majority determines that Ray’s assent was “ voluntary” because 
the family court’s findings are not sufficient to support 
duress. Majority at 35-36. According to the majority, duress 
cannot be shown because: (1) the trial court did not make 
specific findings that Sandra had improperly threatened Ray; and 
(2) Ray could not show that he had no reasonable alternative to 
signing the MOU. In so concluding, the majority errs by 
incorrectly restricting its involuntariness inquiry to duress. 
1.	 The correct Hawaiʻ i standard for the enforceability of 
postmarital agreements 
A postmarital agreement is not enforceable if it is 
entered into involuntarily. “W hen a premarital agreement 
setting forth support and property division in the event of 
divorce is not unconscionable and has been voluntarily entered 
into by the parties with knowledge of the financial situation of 
the prospective spouse, enforcement of the agreement does not 
violate the principle of a ‘just and equitable ’ award under 
[Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 580– 47.”8 Lewis, 69 Haw. at 
8 At the time the “agreements” in this case were signed, this 
statute provided, in relevant part: 
(continued. . .) 
10  
 
    
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
500-01, 748 P.2d at 1366. “Involuntariness is shown by evidence 
of ‘duress, coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstance  
indicating lack of free will or voluntariness.’” Chen v. 
Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai ʻi 346, 357, 279 P.3d 11, 22 (App. 2012) 
(emphasis added) (quoting Prell v. Silverstein , 114 Hawaiʻ i 286, 
298, 162 P.3d 2, 14 (App. 2007)). Therefore, under Hawaii ’s 
controlling legal standard for the enforceability of postmarital 
contracts, involuntariness may be shown not only by duress, but 
also by coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstance 
indicating lack of free will or voluntariness. 
2.	 The family court found that Ray’s assent was 
involuntary. 
After listing ten contributing facto rs to Ray’s 
stress, as noted above, Conclusion of Law (COL) P determined 
9that:
(. . .continued)   
Upon granting a divorce . . . the court may make any 
further orders as shall appear just and equitable . 
. . 
finally dividing and distributing the estate of the 
parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community, 
joint, or separate[.] 
HRS § 580
-47 (1997) .  This language was identical at the time of Lewis. 
HRS § 580-47 (Supps. 1969, 1986). 
9 Although COL P is set out as a conclusion of law, “the trial 
court’s label is not determinative of the standard of review.” Crosby v. 
State Dep’t of Budget & Fin ., 76 Hawaiʻ i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994). 
A circuit court’s FOF are reviewed on appeal under the “clearly 
erroneous” standard whereas its COL are not binding upon an appellate court 
and are usually reviewed under the right/wrong standard. Estate of Klink ex 
rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai ʻi 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). 
(continued. . .) 
11  
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
      
  
  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Ray was thus under duress and coercion when he signed the 
agreements.
  Prell v. Silverstein, 114 Haw. 286, 162 P.3d 2 
(Haw. App. 2007).  
(Emphasis added). While the family court referred to “duress 
and coercion” without using the word “involuntary,” its specific 
citation to Prell makes it plain that the family court intended “duress and coercion” to convey involuntariness.
10 This is 
manifest because Prell defines duress and coercion as sufficient 
to demonstrate involuntariness, but not as the exclusive method 
of doing so. In the context of evaluating a premarital agreement, 
Prell states : “[n]o evidence was adduced that 
[spouse] signed the premarital agreement under duress, coercion, undue influence, or any other circumstance indicating lack of 
free will or voluntariness .” 114 Hawai ʻi at 298, 162 P.3d at 14. 
That is, Prell 
references “duress” as one “circumstance” of 
several “indicating [a] lack of free will or voluntariness .” 
Id. 
(. . .continued) 
A COL that “is supported by the trial court’s FOFs and that reflects an 
application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned.” Id. 
(brackets omitted). “However, a COL that presents mixed questions of fact 
and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the court’s 
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual 
case.” Id.  
In other words, because the famil y court’s COL P is a “determination 
that embraces an ultimate fact[,]” it “is a factual finding subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review even though classified as a COL.” 
Crosby
, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 340, 874 P.2d at 1308. 
10 This same test is utilized by the majority in its analysis.  See  
Majority at 35. 
12  
 
    Thus, by describing the totality of the circumstances,  
including Ray’s uncontrollable behavior, extreme stress, fear of 
being discovered, and the escalating tension in the 
relationship, then concluding that Ray was under duress and 
coercion, and then citing  to  Prell, the family court implicitly 
found that Ray’s assent to the agreements  
was involuntary.    To 
conclude otherwise infers that the family court, despite citing  
the controlling authority  that sets forth  the standard for  
voluntariness in postmarital contracts, did not understand and 
11 apply the law that it cited.    
   
 
  
  In re Doe,
  
                                                        
    
 
   
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Voluntariness is a question of fact.  See State v. 
Price, 55 Haw. 442, 443, 521 P.2d 376, 377 (1974) (in the 
context of a search, holding that voluntariness is a question of 
fact).  The family court was in the best position to make 
factual findings.  95 Hawai ʻi 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 
623 (2001) (“[I]t is well -settled that an appellate court will 
not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses 
and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the 
trier of fact.”
)). 
11 Assuming arguendo that COL P is ambiguous as to whether the 
family court intended “duress and coercion” to mean involuntariness, then the 
case should be remanded to the family court for clarification.  “‘Because 
. . . findings [of fact] are imperative for an adequate judicial review of a 
lower court’s conclusions of law,’ we have held ‘ that cases will be remanded 
when the factual basis of t he lower court’s ruling cannot be determined from 
the record.’” State v. Hutch , 75 Haw. 307, 331, 861 P.2d 11, 23 (1993) 
(quoting 
State v. Anderson , 67 Haw. 513, 514, 693 P.2d 1029, 1030 (1985)). 
13  
 
       
 
 
  Id.   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
     
   
  
                                                        
   
 
     
 
      
   
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A family court’ s FOF are reviewed under the “clearly 
erroneous” standard. In re Doe,  101 Hawai ʻi 220, 227, 65 P.3d 
167, 174 (2003).  A FOF is only “clearly erroneous ” when “ (1) 
the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or 
(2)
 despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made.”12 Therefore, it 
is improper for this court to disregard the family court’s 
findings of fact regarding voluntariness 
if the findings of the 
family court are supported by substantial evidence. 
3.	 Substantial evidence supports finding that Ray’s 
assent was involuntary 
The family court ’s uncontested FOFs support a 
conclusion that Ray’s assent to the “agreements ” was 
involuntary.13 First, as noted above and set forth in COL P, the 
family court found that among the multiple factors contributing 
to the coercion and duress that led to Ray’s involuntary asse nt 
12 Substantial evidence is credible evidence of sufficient quality 
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion. In re Doe , 101 Hawai ʻi at 227, 65 P.3d at 174. 
13 The “agreements” should be examined together for several reasons. 
First, the circumstances under which the “agreements” were executed were 
virtually identical. The October 6, 2008 agreement and the MOU were signed 
within three weeks of each other, during which time the tension between Ray 
and Sandra was high and had not d issipated. As noted above, “E ach time, Ray 
believed he could salvage the marriage by signing these agreements.  He would have signed anything.” Second, t he subject matter of the agreements is also 
the same, providing essentially the same triggering event, i.e. separation or divorce. Finally, three of the four provisions of the MOU are the same as the three provisions of the October 6 Document. Therefore, all the 
“agreements” should be considered together when evaluating the voluntariness 
of Ray’s assent. 
14  
 
    
  
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
                                                        
    
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
were: his exhibitionist behavior and the associated 
repercussions from that behavior, including the letters from the 
AOAO, confrontations with the police at Makapu ʻu, and being 
banned from Ala Moana; the litigation and construction problems 
associated with the home; and his “high security clearance job .” 
Second, the facts demonstrate that Ray’s mental state 
was extremely vulnerable.  The family court described Ray as 
“unable to control his inappropriate behavior ”; “extremely 
embarrassed but still unable to control his impulses ”; and 
“distraught that he had no control over and did not know what to 
do about his inappropriate behavior.  He “felt his brain was 
fried”; “fearful of his behavior being made ” public; “not in his 
right mind”; “desperate ”; and “in a panic .” Following the first 
two “agreements,” Ray’s exhibition ist behavior escalated, 
including two letters f rom the homeowners’ association ; an 
incident at Makapuʻ u Trail; and an incident at Ala Moana. These 
findings of fact are uncontested. Therefore, Ra y’s mental state 
was plainly vulnerable, increasing the likelihood that duress or 
undue influence was instrumental in gaining his assent and 
reducing the likelihood that his assent to the agreements was 
voluntary.14 
14 The majority notes Ray’s educat ion, degrees , and high- level 
security clearance as an indication that Ray was aware of what he was doing.  
Majority at 41. However, Ray never asserted that he was not aware; instead 
his contention is that his stress and efforts to preserve his marriage 
(continued. . .) 
15  
 
      
   
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
                                              
(. . .continued)                                                                                                                                       
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Third, Sandra was drafting the “agreements.” Sandra 
dictated the October 6 Document to Ray. Sandra also prepared 
the MOU, which added the $100,000 payment to her in the event of 
a divorce. Therefore, in light of Sandra having drafted the 
“agreements,” the likelihood that Ray’s assent to the 
“agreements” was involuntary was increased. 
Fourth, the uncontested facts are that Ray felt he had 
no choice but to sign the “agreements. ” As to the October 6 
Document, “Ray believed if he did not sign this note, he would 
lose his wife of thirty years and everything they had worked for 
together.” As to the MOU, “ Ray signed it in his desperate 
attempt to hold the marriage together. ” As to all three 
“agreements,” “each time, Ray believed he could salvage the 
marriage by signing these agreements. He would have signed 
anything to save their thirty-year marriage. He was in a 
panic.” 
Thus, there is substantial evidence in the record 
indicating that Ray’s asse nt to the three “agreements” was 
induced by circumstances indicating a lack of free will or 
indicated a lack of free will. The majority also notes that Ray “expressly 
testified that he agreed to all the terms of the MOU.” Id. 
Again, Ray never 
denied agreeing to the terms of the “agreements. ” The issue was whether his 
assent was voluntary under the circumstances. 
16  
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
    
 
  
   
                                                        
   
 
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
voluntariness.15 Accordingly, the family court’s implicit 
finding that Ray’s assent was involuntary was not clearly 
erroneous and should be upheld. 
4.	 “Other circumsta nces” indicates that Ray’s assent was 
involuntary 
Involuntariness in postmarital contracts may be shown 
by evidence of “any other circumstance indicating lack of free 
will or voluntariness.” Chen, 127 Hawai ʻi at 357, 279 P.3d at 
22; Prell
, 114 Hawai ʻi at 298, 162 P.3d at 14. Because “other 
circumstances” is broad ly inclusive, it is similar to a totality 
of the circumstances rule, under which a court’s “inquiry will 
not be unfairly limited.” Maguire v. Hilton Hotels Corp.,  79 
Hawai
ʻi 110, 117, 899 P.2d 393, 400 (1995) (defining totality of 
the circumstances as a part of determining, in a tort action, 
the foreseeability of a criminal act committed by a third 
party). A totality of the circumstances “inquiry i s broad 
enough to examine other factors as well.” Id. Other states 
15 The majority suggests that because Ray waived the defense of lack 
of capacity, he also waived the defense of involuntariness.  Majority at 40. 
However, involuntariness is distinct from a defense of lack of capacity.  See  
Grace M. Giesel, A Realistic Proposal for the Contract Duress Doctrine, 107 
W.
 Va. L. Rev. 443, 448 (2005) (“Situations of limited decisional capacity or 
flawed decisional capacity are not duress and should be irrelevant to 
duress.”). Incapacity to contract means that the person was “incapable of 
understanding the nature and effect of the transaction at the time the instrument was executed.” 
Pontes v. Pontes , 40 Haw. 620, 623 (Haw. Terr. 
1954). See also 
5 Williston on Contract § 10:3 (4th ed.) (Mental 
incompetence renders transactions voidable); Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 15 (1981). Consequently, a c apacity to enter into contracts does 
not invalidate an i nvoluntariness defense.  Ray never waived the issue of 
whether his assent was voluntary. 
17  
 
   
   
   
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                        
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
have used a totality of circumstances approach in assessing the 
enforceability of postmarital agreements. 
For example, in Pacelli v. Paccelli, 725 A.2d 56 (N.J. 
Super. Ct. App. Div. 1999), the New Jersey Superior Court 
closely scrutinized and carefully evaluated a “mid-marriage”16 
agreement because it left the husband, a sophisticated businessman, and wife, a much younger, uneducated immigrant, in 
disparate financial situations. 
Id. at 62.  After ten years of 
marriage and two children, the husband informed the wife that he 
would divorce her unless she agreed to certain terms regarding 
their economic relationship. Id.  at 58. The wife’s overriding 
concern was preserving her family —“she would [have] 
sign[ed] 
anything
[.]” Id. (emphasis added).  
Thus, [the wife] faced a more difficult choice than the 
bride who is presented with a demand for a pre -nuptial 
agreement. The cost to [the wife] would have been the destruction of a family and the stigma of a failed 
marriage. She testified on several occasions that she signed the agreement to preserve the family and to make 
sure that her sons were raised in an intact family. 
[The wife’s] access to eminent counsel is of little 
relevance because her decision was dictated not by a 
consideration of her legal rights, but by her desire to 
preserve the family. 
Id. at 59.  Based on these circumstances, the court found that 
the context in which 
the husband made his demand was “inherently 
coercive” because the wife’s decision “was dictated not by a 
A “mid-marriage” agreement is the same as a “postmarital” 
agreement in the context of these cases as both occur after the date of 
marriage but prior to a final divorce. 
18 16  
 
     
     
      In re Marriage of Baltins,   
    
   
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
consideration of her legal rights, but by her desire to preserve 
the family.” Id. Therefore, the 
Pacelli court looked to the 
totality of the circumstances in reaching its determination that 
the postmarital agreement was unenforceable. Id. at 63. 
In
 212 Cal. App. 3d 66 
(Cal. Ct. App. 1989), a California appeals court examined the 
totality of the circumstances in finding that the husband 
intentionally used coercion to induce the w ife’s consent to an 
unconscionable contract.  Id. at 87. The court found that the 
wife was “effectively” deprived of independent counsel, in a 
distraught and weakened condition emotionally, and had no 
reasonable alternative.  The husband had undermined the wife 
psychologically by repeatedly telling her she had not 
contributed as much as he did to the marriage and was not an 
equal partner; he had made threats and misrepresentations; and 
he pressured the wife into taking immediate action.  Id.  
Therefore, the Baltins
 court looked at the totality of the 
circumstances to find the husband had intentionally used duress to induce the wife’s consent to the agreements. 
Id.  
Other states have used a series of factors to 
measure 
the enforceability of postmarital agreements. For instance, 
Kansas courts have looked to whether: 
(1) each party had an opportunity to obtain separate legal 
counsel of each party’ s own choosing; (2) there was fraud 
or coercion in obtaining the agreement; (3) all material assets were fully disclosed by both parties before the 
19  
 
   
  
  See also   
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
    
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
agreement was executed; (4) each spouse knowingly and 
explicitly agreed in writing to waive the right to a 
judicial equitable division of assets and all marital 
rights in the event of a divorce; (5) the terms of the 
agreement were fair and reasonable at the time of 
execution; and (6) the terms of the agreement are not unconscionable at the time of dissolution. 
In re Marriage Traster, 291 P.3d 494, 507  (2012). 
Ansin v. Craven-Ansin,  929 N.E.2d 955, 963-64 (2010) (using the 
first five factors to measure enforceability but not 
unconscionability). 
In the application of the totality of circumstances 
and factor-based analyses, courts are not arbitrarily limited to a single test when analyzing postmarital contra
cts for 
involuntariness, but look to all the relevant conditions in a given case. Similarly, under the 
Chen/Prell  standard, 
involuntariness can be found by evaluating “any other 
circumstance indicating lack of free will or voluntariness .” 
Chen
, 127 Hawaiʻ i at 357, 279 P.3d at 22; Prell, 114 Hawai ʻi at 
298, 162 P.3d at 14 . Therefore, a court’s analysis of the 
enforceability of postmarital contracts should not be “ unfairly 
limited” and should be “broad enough to examine other factors.” 
Maguire, 79 Hawaiʻ i at 117, 899 P.2d at 400. 
In the present case, the other circumstances 
specified in the uncontested findings firmly support the 
determination that Ray’s assent to the “agreements” was involuntary. 
Like Pacelli,  Ray’s motivation was not preserving 
20  
 
   
  
 
      
   
 
 
   
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
financial assets, but at saving the emotional relationship at 
any cost. Further, both the Pacelli court and the family court 
found that the vulnerable spouse would have signed “anything.” 
See Pacelli, 725 A.2d at 58. Similar to Baltins
, Sandra 
pressured Ray into immediate action, and, as discussed, Ray believed he had no other choice. 212 Cal. App. 3d at 87. Ray 
was in a distraught and weakened emotional state and did not 
have the opportunity to consult with independent counsel, again 
similar to the wife in 
Baltins. Id. 
Additionally, a
t least three of the six Traster 
factors were also present.  First, Ray did not obtain separate 
legal counsel before signing the “agreements.” Second, Ray did 
not knowingly and explicitly agree in writing to waive the right 
to a judicial equitable division of material assets and all 
marital rights in the event of a divorce. Third, the terms of 
the agreement were not fair and reasonable at the time of 
execution. 
Therefore, construing Prell’s “any other 
circumstances” element as not “unfairly limit[ing]” and broad 
enough to examine other factors, would result in the same 
conclusion as the family court: that the “agreements” were 
involuntary and thus unenforceable. 
21  
 
    
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                        
    
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5.	 The record demonstrates Ray’s assent was unduly 
influenced 
Under Chen and Prell, an agreement may also be 
involuntary if it is the result of undue influence.17 Chen, 127 
Hawaiʻi at 357, 279 P.3d at 22; Prell , 114 Hawai ʻi at 298, 162 
P.3d at 14. Undue influence is defined as the improper use of 
power or trust in a way that deprives a person of free will and 
substitutes another’ s objective. Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 
125 Hawaiʻ i 128, 160, 254 P.3d 439, 471 (2011).  It is 
the misuse of a position of confidence   or the taking 
advantage of a person’s weakness, in firmity or distress  to 
change improperly that person’ s actions or decisions. 
While it is impossible to define or describe with precision 
and exactness what is undue influence, it matters that the quality and the extent of the power of one mind over 
another must be to make it undue. Thus, false 
representations, or misrepresentations of law or fact, are 
not essential to a showing of undue influence, for a  
person’s will may be overborne without false 
representation.  
Cvitanovich-Dubie,  125 Hawai ʻi at 160-61, 254 P.3d at 471-72  
(emphasis added) (ci
tations, brackets and quotation marks 
omitted). Undue influence is “coercive in nature, persuasion 
which overcomes the will without convincing the judgment.” 
Odorizzi v. Bloomfield Sch. Dist.
, 246 Cal.  App. 2d 123, 130  
(1966) (cited approvingly in Cvitanovich
-Dubie, 125 Hawaiʻ i at 
160-61, 254 P.3d at 471-72).  Therefore, the critical elements 
17 The majority notes that the family court did not make an express 
finding of undue influence. Majority at 41.  However, undue influence is an 
enumerated “ circumstance indicating lack of free will or involuntariness.” 
Chen, 127 Hawaiʻ i at 357, 279 P.3d at 22. As the family court’s finding of 
“duress and coercion” was an implici t finding of involuntariness, undue 
influence was encompassed within the court’s findings. 
22  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of undue influence are (1) the abuse of a position of confidence 
or taking advantage of a person’s weakness, in order to (2) 
improperly change that person’s actions or decisions; actual 
fraud is not necessary
.  Cvitanovich-Dubie , 125 Hawaiʻ i at 160 -
61, 254 P.3d at 471
-72. 
As a spouse, Sandra was in a position of confidence in 
regards to Ray and it was an abuse of 
that confidence to 
influence her spouse to sign over significant property in order 
to demonstrate his commitment to the marriage. Furthermore, 
Ray’s actions were improperly changed by Sandra; that is, he 
would not have promised her half of his interest in the house, all of the vehicles and contents of the house, and $100,000 in lieu of court proceedings, except for Sandra having told Ray “ if 
he were serious about being committed to the marriage, then they should ‘write something up.’” None of the facts found by the 
family court suggest that Ray was convinced the “agreements” 
were in good judgment; rather, it is unchallenged that “[e]ach 
time, Ray believed he could salvage the marriage by signing 
these agreements. 
 He would have signed anything to save their 
thirty year marriage .” (Emphasis added).   Thus, Ray would not 
have signed over his share of the home in the “agreements”  and 
the additional monetary payments to Sandra if it had not been on 
Sandra’s insistence that he do so in order to demonstrate his 
commitment to save the marriage.  
23  
 
    
   
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
There is substantial evidence that Sandra’s actions 
took advantage of her position as Ray’s wife of 30 years and 
Ray’s troubled emotional state in order to induce Ray to sign 
the “agreements.” There is no indication that Ray would have 
otherwise spontaneously gifted essentially 100% of the marital estate to Sandra. Therefore, Sandra unduly influenced Ray’s 
assent to the “agreements”, and Ray’s assent to the “agreements” 
is indicative of a lack of free will or voluntariness. Thus, 
the family court’s implicit conclusion that Ray’s assent was 
involuntary should be affirmed. 
C.	 Measuring involuntariness through a fiduciary relationship 
between spouses 
The confidential relationship between spouses should 
require contracts to be subjected to a fiduciary standard to 
protect spouses against self-dealing and overreaching by the 
more dominant spouse. “Unlike parties to a premarital agreement 
or a separation agreement, parties to a postmarital agreement have stated their intention to remain part of an existing 
marriage in which they already share a vested interest, personal 
intimacy, and mutual trust.” Traster, 291 P.3d at 503. In 
Traster, the Kansas Court of Appeals explained that the 
“trusting and confidential nature of th is existing relationship 
exposes the parties to a greater risk of unfair advantage in the bargaining process for two reasons ”: 
24  
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
First, spouses who intend to stay married are unlikely to 
view the marital interest as distinct from their own 
interest. As a result, spouses to a postmarital agreement 
run the risk of putting the interests of the couple ahead 
of their own which, in turn, will make them less cautious 
than they would be if negotiating at arm’s length with an ordinary contracting party. Second, spouses who  intend to 
stay married run a greater risk of unfair advantage in the bargaining process because 
the spouse who has the stronger 
desire to preserve the marriage necessarily becomes more vulnerable to the financial demands of the other .  
Id. at 503 (emphasis added) (citation omitted).  Therefore, 
Traster recognized two concerns: (1) spouses who wish to stay 
married are likely to put the marriage ahead of their individual 
interest; and (2) such spouses may be exploited because their 
commitment to the marriage will lead them to make greater financial sacrifices to preserve the relationship. Because of 
these concerns, the voluntariness of postmarital agreements 
should be evaluated with closer scrutiny. 
Sixteen states and Puerto Rico impose greater burdens 
on postnuptial agreements than they impose o
n prenuptial 
agreements. Sean Hannon Williams,  Postnuptial Agreements , 2007 
Wis. L. Rev. 827, 838 (2007). The state courts and legislatures 
that have imposed additional procedural and substantive burdens 
on postnuptial agreements recognize that postmarital agreements “increase the potential for fraud and deception, often leaving 
the spouse with less economic leverage (usually the wife) with 
no choice but to sign an agreement presented by the wealthier 
spouse (usually the husband),” as opposed to premarital 
agreements. Id. at 830 (parentheticals in original). 
25  
 
    Other jurisdictions have required review under a   
fiduciary standard,  based on the fact that spouses stand in a 
confidential relationship with each other, and postmarital    
agreements are “executed when the parties do not contemplate 
divorce and when they owe absolute fidelity   to each other.” 
Ansin, 929 N.E.2d at   968 (emphasis added).   See In re Estate of  
Wilber, 75 A.3d 1096, 1101 (N.H. 2013  ) (“spouses are 
traditionally regarded as fiduciaries of one another ”); Tremont 
v. Tremont, 827 N.Y.S.2d 309, 311 (2006)  (“courts carefully 
scrutinize marital agreements based on the fiduciary 
relationship of the parties”); Dawbarn v. Dawbarn , 625 S.E.2d 
186, 191 (N.C. Ct. App. 2006) (“The relationship between a husband and wife creates a fiduciary duty. ”); Marsh v. Marsh, 
949 S.W.2d 734, 739  n.4 (Tex. App. 1997)   (“in post-marital 
agreements a fiduciary duty exists that is not present in 
premarital agreements between prospective spouses”); In re 
Marriage of Bonds, 5 P.3d 815, 831 (Cal. 2000)  (“persons, once 
they are married, are in a fiduciary relationship to one 
another”).  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
A fiduciary duty between spouses means that 
agreements 
between them “must meet the high standards of fiduciary trust, 
which means that there must be full disclosure and fair dealing.” Howard O. Hunter, 
Modern Law of Contracts  § 2:24 
(2014).  Courts holding spouses to a fiduciary standard require 
26  
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“the highest degree of good faith, candor and sincerity in all 
matters bearing on the terms and execution of the proposed 
agreement, with fairness being the ultimate mea sure.” Wilber, 
75 A.3d at 1101 (emphasis omitted). “Because of the 
confidential relationship between a husband and a wife, courts 
have imposed the same duties of good faith and fair dealing on 
spouses as required of partners and other fiduciaries.” Daniel 
v. Daniel, 779 S.W.2d 110, 115 (Tex. App. 1989) . “When an 
interspousal transaction advantages one spouse, the law . . . presumes such transactions to have been induced by undue 
influence. Courts of equity view gifts and contracts which are 
made or take place between parties occupying confidential 
relations with a jealous eye.” In re Marriage of Haines , 33 
Cal. App. 4th 277, 293 
-94 (1995) (citations, brackets, ellipsis, 
and quotation marks removed). For example, based on concerns 
over the uneven power dynamics in a mid-marriage context, 
California appellate courts have instituted a presumption of duress when considering the enforceability of postmarital 
agreements. Bonds, 5 P.3d 
at 831. “Whenever [married persons] 
enter into an agreement in which one party gains an advantage, 
the advantaged party bears the burden of demonstrating that the 
agreement was not  obtained through undue influence.” Id.  
(emphasis added). 
27  
 
    In keeping with the twin concerns expressed by  Traster  
that spouses who wish to stay married are likely to put the 
marriage ahead of their individual interest and that such  
spouses may be exploited, transactions between spouses shou  ld be 
subject to the general rules governing fiduciary relationships,  
which guide the actions of persons occupying confidential  
18   relations with each other.  See  Cal. Fam. Code § 721 (2002).
This requirement would impose a duty of  good faith and fair 
dealing on each spouse, such that neither could  take an unfair 
advantage of the other.  The confidential relationship  and  
                                                        
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 The California code provide the following definition of a 
fiduciary relationship between spouses: 
[I]n transactions between themselves, a husband and wife 
are subject to the general rules governing fiduciary 
relationships which control the actions of persons 
occupying confidential relations with each other. This 
confidential relationship imposes a duty of the highest good faith and fair dealing on each spouse, and neither 
shall take any unfair advantage of the other. This 
confidential relationship is a fiduciary relationship 
subject to the same rights and duties of nonmarital 
business partners . . . including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) Providing each spouse access at all times to any books 
kept regarding a transaction for the purposes of inspection 
and copying. 
(2) Rendering upon request, true and full information of 
all things affecting any transaction which concerns the 
community property. Nothing in this section is intended to 
impose a duty for either spouse to keep detailed books and 
records of community property transactions. 
(3) Accounting to the spouse, and holding as a trustee, any 
benefit or profit derived from any transaction by one 
spouse without the consent of the other spouse which concerns the community property. 
Cal. Fam. Code § 721 (2003 ). 
28  
 
     
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
fiduciary relationship would be subject to the same rights and 
duties of non-marital business partners. 
I would hold that an agreement that was not in 
accordance with fiduciary standards should be presumptively 
involuntary and unenforceable, and such agreements would be 
enforceable only if the defending spouse could demonstrate that 
the agreements in question were executed under a fiduciary 
standard of good faith and fair dealing. Given Ray’s extreme 
mental distress and vulnerable state of mind described by the 
uncontested findings of the family court and the financial 
advantage gained by Sandra, the record before this court is 
clear that the agreements between Sandra and Ray do not meet the 
highest fair dealing standard of fiduciary trust, and the 
agreements are therefore presumptively involuntary and 
unenforceable. 
D.	 The October 6 “agreement” and MOU are invalid and 
unenforceable for lack of consideration 
As an alternative basis for affirming the judgment of 
the family court, I would examine the threshold issue of whether 
the October 6 Document and MOU were supported by consideration 
sufficient to form a contract. Ray raised the defense of lack 
of consideration as a defense at trial. The family court’s 
declination to make a determination as to lack of consideration 
was plain error, under the standards adopted by this court. 
29  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In civil cases, the plain error rule is only invoked when 
“justice so requires.” We have taken three factors into 
account in deciding whether our discretionary power to 
notice plain error ought to be exercised in civil cases: 
(1) whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial 
requires additional facts ; (2) whether its resolution will 
affect the integrity of the trial court ’s findings of fact; 
and (3) whether the issue is of great public import . 
U.S. Bank Nat’l Ass’n v. Castro , 131 Hawai ʻi 28, 42, 313 P.3d 
717, 731 (2013) (emphases added) (quoting Montalvo v. Lapez,  77 
Hawaiʻi 282, 290, 884 P.2d 345, 353 (1994)). Here, with respect 
to the first two factors, no additional facts must be considered 
to determine the issue and finding a lack of consideration will 
not affect the integrity of the family court’ s FOFs. As to the 
final factor, the adequacy of consideration in postmarital 
agreements is of great public import because upholding such 
contracts without true bargained-for exchange does not allow the 
family court to exercise its authority to effect “just and 
equitable” distributions of the marital estate. See 
HRS § 580 -
47 (“the [family] court may make any further orders as shall 
appear just and equitable 
. . . finally dividing and 
distributing the estate of the parties ”); Gussin v. Gussin,  73 
Haw. 470, 478, 836 P.2d 484, 488-89 (1992) (noting the wide 
discretion conferred upon the family court by HRS § 580-47); 
Lewis
, 69 Haw. at 500-01, 748 P.2d at 1366 (holding that 
premarital agreements are enforceable when they do not violate 
the principle of a “just and eq uitable” award under HRS § 580– 
30  
 
    
 
   
   
   
 Sylvester v. Animal Emergency 
 
  
 
 
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
47). Therefore, invoking plain error is appropriate in this 
case. 
1. Consideration in postmarital contracts 
All contracts made between spouses, not otherwise 
invalid because of any other law, are valid. HRS § 572-22 
(1987).  However, the formation of a contract requires a bargain 
in which there is a manifestation of mutual assent to the 
exchange and consideration. Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 
17 (1981) (emphasis added).  This court has stated that “[a] 
compromise, like any other contractual agreement, must be supported by consideration.” 
Clinic of Oahu,  72 Haw. 560, 567, 825 P.2d 1053, 1057 (1  992).  
Therefore, consideration is a threshold issue in determining 
whether a contract exists. 
“
It is well-settled that consideration is an essential 
element of, and is necessary to the enforceability or validity 
of, a contract.” Douglass v. Pflueger Haw., Inc.
, 110 Hawai ʻi 
520, 534, 135 P.3d 129, 143 (2006) (quoting Shanghai Inv. Co., 
Inc. v. Alteka Co., Ltd.
, 92 Hawaiʻ i 482, 496, 993  P.2d 516, 530 
(2000), 
overruled on other grounds by Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawaiʻ i 
327, 31 P.3d 184 (2001)).  To constitute consideration, a 
performance or a return promise must be bargained for. 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 71 (1981).  Consideration 
may take many forms; it is well established that “ [f]orbearance 
31  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
  See Bratton v.  
  
  
 
 
                                                        
 19   But cf.   Zagari v. Zagari, 746 N.Y.S.2d 235, 238 (2002)  (declining 
to find lack of consideration in a post  marital agreement where the agreement 
recited consideration and the spouse seeking to invalidate the agreement 
offered no proof on the issue of consideration).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to exercise a right is good consideration for a promise.” 
Shannon v. Waterhouse
, 58 Haw. 4, 7, 563 P.2d 391, 393 (1977).  
Although the family court di
d not address the issue of 
the lack of consideration, the determination of lack of 
consideration is a question of law for the court to decide, 
reviewable de novo. Stern v. Stern,  243 A.2d 319, 320 (Pa. 
1968); Colligan v. Smith , 366 S.W.2d 816, 818 (Tex. App. 1963); 
Farmers Union Oil Co. of New England v. Maixner, 376 N.W.2d 43, 
48 n.2 (N.D. 1985). 
This court has not examined what 
constitutes consideration for a postnuptial contract between spouses. Other courts have held that neither the marriage 
itself, nor continuation of the marriage, can act as sufficient 
consideration for a postnuptial agreement because past 
consideration cannot support a current promise. 
Bratton
, 136 S.W.3d 595, 600 (Tenn. 2004); Whitmore v. Whitmore,  
778 
N.Y.S.2d 73, 75 (2004).19 
In Bratton , a husband signed a letter in which he 
promised “never to be the cause of a divorce.” Bratton
, 136 
S.W.3d at 597.  In the event that he broke the promise, he promised to give to the wife “ 50% of my present belongings and 
50% of my net future earnings. ” 
Id.  The Supreme Court of 
32  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Tennessee found that a promise to stay in a marriage is not 
consideration. 
Ms. Bratton’s promise not to leave her husband is clearly 
not consideration for the agreement .  Both parties’  
admitted that they 
were not having marital difficulties at 
the time the agreement was signed.  Therefore, this was not 
a reconciliation agreement where separation or divorce was 
imminent, making  the wife’s promise to remain in the 
marriage a meaningful act.    
Id. at 603 (emphases added).  Similarly, in Whitmore, 16 years 
before actually divorcing, the husband and wife executed a 
document entitled “Marital Agreement” in which the wife “waived 
her right to any business property owned by the husband, 
regardless whether it was acquired before or after the 
marriage.” Whitmore,  778 N.Y.S.2d at 74.  The court found that: 
Here, the wife received no consideration for signing the 
postnuptial agreement. The postnuptial agreement does not 
recite any consideration, and does not contain any mutual promises.
   Although the wife released her claims on the 
husband’s business property, he did not relinquish any 
rights to any of her property or give the wife anything in 
return.  The husband claims that his continuing to remain 
married to the wife provided adequate consideration.  We 
disagree.  
 
Id. at 75 (emphases added).  Therefore, when there is no actual 
intent or contemplation of divorce, postmarital contracts, in 
which one spouse promises to relinquish significant property 
rights in the event of divorce, and the other side only promises 
to remain in the marriage or to not get divorced, are void for 
lack of consideration. 
33  
 
     
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
                                                        
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2. The “agreements” lack consideration 
Here, it is not clear as to what was the bargained-for 
exchange that would support the existence of a contract in the 
first two agreements.20 The October 6 Document provided that in 
the event of a separation, Ray would give up half of his interest in the couple’s home worth approximately $1.6 million, 
plus the contents of the home (except his clothes and tools), 
plus any interest in the couple’s vehicles. In the MOU, Ray 
additionally agreed to pay $100,000 in lieu of alimony and court 
proceedings. Therefore, Ray’s promise in the first two 
“agreements” is clear; in the event of a divorce or separation, 
he would relinquish or pay significant property to Sandra. 
However, it is not clear what constituted Sandra’s 
return performance or promise. The documents themselves do not recite an exchange of promises. Intuitively, it would seem that 
Sandra’s return “promise” was forbearance of her right to 
divorce Ray. However, divorce was not 
on Sandra’s mind—
it is 
the uncontested findings of the family court that “ Sandra was 
not thinking about a divorce ; she took Ray’s signing [of the 
October 6 Document] as a show of his commitment” ; “[t]he parties 
signed the MOU with the intent that they would work on the 
marriage
”; “Sandra believed Ray signed the Quitclaim Deed 
20 The Quitclaim Deed contained its own recitation of consideration. 
34  
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
                                                        
    
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
because he was serious about saving the marriage.” (Emphases 
added). The family cou rt found “that the parties were motivated 
to save the marriage when they signed the various agreements 
. . . . Neither party intended their marriage to result in a 
divorce and to divide thei r marital estate accordingly.” Even 
after overhearing Ray say “maybe divorce” to his sister, Sandra still “wanted Ray to work on the marriage[.]”  As it is the 
uncontested findings of the family court that when Sandra signed 
the first two agreements she did not intend to divorce Ray, 
Sandra’s return promise could not h ave been to forbear from 
acting on her legal right to divorce Ray. 
At oral argument, counsel for Sandra characterized the 
consideration for the October 6 “agreement” as the exchange of 
mutual promises: “You promise to work hard on the marriage, and 
I promise to work hard on the marriage, and if this thing 
doesn’t work, this promise for promise, then this is how we’re 
going to divide our assets.”
21 When pressed on the issue of 
consideration for the subsequent agreements, counsel conceded, 
“We really didn’t delve into what the consideration was . . . We 
really didn’t delve into that.”22 Moreover, a promise to work 
hard or stay in the marriage would not serve as consideration 
21 MP3: Oral Argument, Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court, at 31:40 (Mar. 4, 
2013), http:// www.courts.state.hi.us/courts/oral_arguments/archive/ 
oasc_11_1074.html. 
22 Id. at 33:10 .  
35  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 77  (1981).  That is, 
promises which allow the promisor to choose from a range of 
alternative return performances, at least some of which would 
not constitute consideration, cannot constitute consideration.  
 
  
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
under Whitmore  or Bratton .  Whitmore , 778 N.Y.S.2d at 75; 
Bratton,
 136 S.W.3d at 600, 603.  Sandra and Ray were already in 
a legal union, therefore, a promise by either to remain in the 
relationship would not constitute a new promise.  
Such promises by Sandra would also be illusory. 
An 
illusory promise is not consideration. 
A promise or apparent promise is not consideration if by 
its terms the promisor or purported promisor reserves a 
choice of alternative performances unless  
(a)
 each of the alternative performances would have been 
consideration if it alone had been bargained for; or 
(b) one of the alternative performances would have been 
consideration and there is or appears to the parties to be 
a substantial possibility that before the promisor exercises his choice events may eliminate the alternatives 
which would not have been consideration . 
Words of promise which by their terms make performance 
entirely optional with the ‘promisor’ do not constitute a 
promise
. In such cases there might theoretically be a 
bargain to pay for the utterance of the words, but in practice it is performance which is bargained for. Where 
the apparent assurance of performance is illusory, it is 
not consideration for a return promise . 
Id. at cmt. a (citation omitted).  Consequently, a return 
performance that is fully optional cannot constitute 
consideration. Therefore, a promise of return performance that 
allows for alternative performances that include not performing,  
cannot constitute consideration.  
36  
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Here, the promise,  “I promise to work hard in the 
marriage,” would be  illusory because Sandra reserved a right to 
alternative performances —i.e., divorce or separation —which would 
not constitute consideration. Further , Sandra’s performance of  
the  “promise” was entirely optional; that is, there was no 
consequence or detriment to Sandra for a decision to “breach” 
the contract by not working hard in the marriage.  
Sandra did not make a valid return promise in exchange 
for Ray’s promise to relinquish marital property or make certain 
payments in the October 6 Document and the MOU. Therefore, the 
October 6 “agreement” and MOU are voidable by Ray for lack of 
consideration. 
III. Conclusion 
The facts demonstrate that all of the “agreements ” are 
unenforceable. First, the family court correctly found that the 
Quitclaim Deed was unenforceable as unconscionable. Second, the 
family court implicitly found that Ray’s assent to all of the 
agreements was involuntary. As involuntariness is a question of 
fact, the family court may be overturned only if its findings of 
fact are clearly erroneous. Here, the family court’s findings 
are not clearly erroneous because there is substantial evidence 
supporting a finding of involuntariness as there is both ample 
evidence of other circumstances demonstrating involuntariness 
and the record supports a finding of undue influence.  Moreover, 
37  
 
    
  
  
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
this court should require closer scrutiny of postmarital 
contracts, by holding that spouses are fiduciaries of the other.  
Finally, the October 6 Document and the MOU are invalid and 
unenforceable for lack of consideration.  Instead of protecting 
vulnerable parties to a postmarital agreement, the majority’s 
holding allows an overreaching spouse seeking to circumvent 
equitable distribution of marital assets to take financial 
advantage of a committed partner who is desperately trying to 
save the marriage. 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
38 