*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000317 
13-DEC-2013 
12:16 PM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
ERIC J. MINTON and RICHARD M. STANLEY,
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
SIDNEY A. QUINTAL, JOHN C. FUHRMANN,
CITY and COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCWC-11-0000317
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000317; CIV. NO. 07-1-2354)
 
December 13, 2013
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND POLLACK, JJ.,
CIRCUIT JUDGE CASTAGNETTI, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J., RECUSED, AND
CIRCUIT JUDGE KIM, IN PLACE OF McKENNA, J., RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
 
This appeal arises from the actions of
 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees Sidney A. Quintal, John C.
 
Fuhrmann, and the City and County of Honolulu (City)
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(collectively, “Respondents”) to ban two stagehands,
 
Petitioners/Plaintiffs-Appellants Eric J. Minton and Richard M.
 Stanley (collectively, “Petitioners”), from working at certain
 City-owned facilities based on their involvement in a charitable
 concert featuring the City’s mayor. Petitioners challenged the
 ban as an abuse of Respondents’ authority, a violation of due
 
process, and as tortious interference with their prospective
 
business advantage. Following a jury-waived trial, the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) entered a final
 judgment in favor of Respondents on all claims, holding that the
 ban was rationally related to the City’s interest in leasing the
 City’s venues, that Petitioners had shown no constitutionally-
protected right to engage in their chosen profession at such
 venues, and alternatively that Petitioners failed to present
 credible evidence supporting their tort claim. The Intermediate
 Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed, determining that Respondents had
 inherent authority to institute the ban as part of the operations
 and management of the City’s facilities, and Petitioners asserted
 no cognizable property or liberty interest. 
For the reasons stated herein, we hold that the City’s 
ban interfered with Petitioners’ liberty interests under article 
I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution, and the City failed to 
satisfy due process by instituting the ban without affording 
-2­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Petitioners notice and an opportunity to be heard. Accordingly,
 
we vacate the ICA and circuit court judgments and remand the case
 for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
I.
 
The Department of Enterprise Services (DES) is a City
 
department that manages and leases certain City facilities,
 including the Neal S. Blaisdell Center (NBC) and the Waikiki
 Shell Amphitheater (Waikiki Shell). Respondent Quintal was the
 Director of the DES at the time of the pertinent events, and
 reported directly to Honolulu Mayor Muliufi “Mufi” Hannemann
 (Mayor). Respondent Fuhrmann was the Auditoriums Events and
 Services Manager for the DES. He was responsible for managing
 the daily operations of the DES facilities and reported directly
 to Quintal. 
The DES generates revenue for the City by leasing its 
venues. The City does not provide the personnel required for events but refers event promoters to the Local 665 Union, which is the Honolulu chapter of the International Association of 
Theatrical Stage Employees (IATSE), a union representing theater 
and stage workers. The union functions “as a business agent” 
that “receive[s] and fill[s] requests for qualified theatrical and stage professionals from its union membership” for events held in Hawai' i. The City does not have a formal contractual 
agreement with the IATSE. 
-3­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
At the time of the underlying events in this case,
 
Minton had about fifty years of stage and theater experience. He
 
has been a member of the Local 665 union since 1972. Minton
 worked primarily as a stagehand, a worker who shifts scenery,
 adjusts lighting, and performs other tasks required in theatrical
 productions, shows, and events. He also routinely worked as a
 crew chief, the person that “the construction company will deal
 with to coordinate the actions of all the crew.” 
Stanley had about twenty-three years of experience. He
 
worked primarily as a sound technician, responsible for
 recording, transmitting or amplifying sound. 
A.
 
In 2007, the Aloha Medical Mission (AMM), a charitable
 
organization, entered into a standard lease with the DES to rent
 the NBC concert hall for a fundraiser event on August 18, 2007,
 entitled “Four Doctors, A Patient and the Mayor.” The event was
 a concert with musical performances, including a solo singing
 performance by the Mayor. 
The NBC concert hall is equipped with a City-owned
 
public address sound system, as well as stage, lighting and other
 specialized equipment. The City offers lessees the option of
 utilizing the City’s equipment or bringing in outside equipment. 
The AMM contracted to use the City’s house sound system. 
-4­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The house sound system was at least twenty years old at
 
that time. Stanley testified that the sound system was
 
“lacking.” He explained that the mixing board that came with the
 
house sound system was “[e]xtremely limited,” and he “lived in
 
fear that every time [he used it], that it would break down
 before the job was over.” 
The AMM hired J.P. Orias, an event promoter, as the
 
production manager for the event. The AMM had hired him as a
 production manager for two prior events. He had worked with
 Minton on both prior shows and found Minton’s services to be
 satisfactory. 
Minton and Stanley were both hired to work on the
 
August 18 show through the Local 665 referral system. Minton had
 worked as the crew chief at the prior AMM shows, and he was again
 hired in that capacity. Stanley was hired as a sound technician. 
Orias testified that because this was a fundraiser for
 
a medical mission “and not a high-powered mega show,” he was
 limited to a strict budget and everything he did was required to
 be approved by an AMM committee. Both Minton and Stanley were
 aware of AMM’s limited budget. In order to save money, the AMM
 employed a “short crew” of six stagehands for a production that
 normally would have involved about sixteen to twenty stagehands. 
The AMM scheduled three rehearsals with the stage crew
 
to take place on August 13 and 14, as well as on the day of the
 
-5­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
show. According to Minton, “[f]or a show of this size and
 
complexity,” normally “at least five rehearsals” with the stage
 crew would have been held. 
The Mayor attended the second rehearsal on August 14,
 
2007. At that point, the plan was for the Mayor to be
 
accompanied by a pianist, bass player and drum set player. 
During the rehearsal, the stage crew had several encounters with
 
the Mayor’s brother, Nephi Hannemann. In one incident, Nephi
 wanted the stage crew to move the theater’s cyclorama, which is a
 white screen on which images are projected. Minton testified
 that the cyclorama “probably weighs 2000 pounds,” and he “very
 politely” informed Nephi that the screen could not be moved
 because only two men were available to move it and moving the
 screen would require seven men. According to Minton, Nephi
 responded by commenting that Minton “didn’t want to do any
 work[.]” 
In addition, Nephi was “unhappy with the sound system
 
being used,” and expressed that “he wanted a sound system
 comparable to that used by the Society of Seven.” 
Minton testified that it was Orias’ decision to use the
 
City’s wireless microphones for the AMM event. Minton “strongly
 recommended that if the producer insisted on using cordless
 microphones, they not use the Sony microphones” provided by the
 City because the equipment “was low-quality and unsuitable.” 
-6­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Orias confirmed that Minton cautioned him not to use the City’s
 
wireless microphones. Based on Minton’s advice, Orias rented
 four wireless microphones from an independent source. 
The night before the concert the Mayor held an
 
unscheduled rehearsal at the NBC. Orias had no prior warning
 
about the rehearsal and was not present.  In addition, no one on
 
the stage crew, including Minton and Stanley, was present at the
 
rehearsal or aware that the rehearsal took place. 
The final scheduled rehearsal took place on the morning
 
of the show. That day, Orias found out that a five-piece band
 
had been added to the show at the last minute to accompany the
 
Mayor during his solo performance. Minton and Stanley were
 informed of the band’s addition when they arrived for the
 rehearsal. The new instruments were two guitars, a bass player,
 keyboard, and second drum set. 
Minton testified that the last-minute addition of the
 
band was “[t]otally overwhelming” because the crew had planned
 the number of microphones that would be necessary, the size of
 the system console that would handle all of the microphones, and
 how the stage would be set up based on the information that had
 been provided previously. Stanley also testified that the band
 caused problems because the additional instruments required extra
 inputs for the microphones. Because of the addition of the
 
-7­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Mayor’s band, Stanley had to switch the inputs during the show
 
for each particular music group as opposed to having everything
 set up beforehand. Due to the addition of the Mayor’s band, the
 AMM used the City’s wireless microphones, although Orias had not
 wanted to use them based on Minton’s recommendation. 
During the last rehearsal, the stage crew again
 
encountered several problems with Nephi.  Minton testified that
 
Nephi expressed that he wanted the on-stage piano to be moved
 
during the show. Minton responded that this was not possible
 because the piano had been specially placed on the stage and
 moving it would cause the piano to fall out of tune. Minton
 testified that Nephi made “a very nasty comment to me that I just
 didn’t want to do any work.” 
In addition, Minton testified that Nephi “wasn’t
 
satisfied with how [the] rehearsal was going,” and at one point
 Nephi approached him to “order [him] to bring the sound man down
 to the floor.” Minton explained that this “would have been
 foolish, risky,” because “[i]f the system went into feedback . .
 . it could damage the gear[.]” Moreover, Stanley would have been
 able to hear what the sound was like in the auditorium “by
 extending his head out of the [sound] booth” rather than coming
 down to the stage. Minton told Nephi that Stanley “was working
 with it, give him a chance to get it done,” and Nephi responded
 
-8­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
by “storming off.” Minton related that he was courteous during
 
all of his interactions with Nephi, saying, “Yes, sir. No, sir.” 
Stanley testified that he came out of the sound booth
 
several times during the rehearsals. He had discussions with
 Nephi down at the stage in which he explained the limitations of
 the house sound system. Stanley stated that the best place in
 the auditorium to conduct a sound check was the upper balcony. 
Additionally, Stanley echoed Minton’s concern that leaving the
 sound board unattended while it was turned on (in order to hear
 the sound from the stage, as Nephi wanted) would create the risk
 of a “massive feedback, which could mount to the point where it .
 . . hurt the equipment.” 
Matthew K. Lyons, a stagehand who had been a member of
 
the Local 665 Union for thirty years, testified that he worked on
 the AMM show as a “fly man,” a person who moves the drops in the
 concert hall. During the Mayor’s rehearsal, Nephi approached him
 and another stagehand and told them to move the microphones
 around on the stage for the Mayor. Lyons and the second
 stagehand responded, “[W]e already got it under control.” 
According to Lyons, Nephi “came back at me like I was trying to
 pick a fight with him or something,” and Nephi “wanted to
 actually take me outside and fight me[.]” Lyons responded,
 “[Y]ou need to go outside and take a breath.” Nephi then left to
 wait for the Mayor to finish rehearsing. 
-9­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Minton also testified that he observed Nephi “hassling”
 
Lyons: “I heard a comment about let’s go outside, and I thought .
 
. . he also intended to pick a fight. I heard [Lyon’s] comment
 about, you know, you need to cool off, and he just stayed put.” 
The concert was held as scheduled later that day. Gary
 
Sprinkle and Pamela Young, local TV personalities, served as the
 emcees. 
There were some problems during the concert related to
 
sound, including feedback from the wireless microphones, a “drop
 out” of sound from the Mayor’s City-owned wireless microphone
 during the Mayor’s performance, and a faulty connection for the
 guitar in the Mayor’s backup band. Regarding the feedback,
 Stanley testified that during the speaking portions of the show,
 “a wireless condenser type of mike of not the best quality was
 used,” which was susceptible to causing feedback. Stanley also
 explained that it had not been mentioned that the doctors would
 be speaking between their musical performances, until he read the
 script on the day of the show. Thus, at that rehearsal “[t]here
 was pretty much an on-the-fly training program with [Minton]”
 trying to get the doctors to enunciate and be audible to the
 audience. Stanley testified that “it was obvious that these
 doctors were not professional speakers at all, they were
 practically whispering . . . into the microphones, and that made
 it very difficult to make them audible.” At the concert, none of
 
-10­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the feedback occurred during a musical piece. Stanley testified
 
that there was “a very short burst of feedback” between musical
 performances when “inexperienced speakers” were “whispering into
 the mike,” and Stanley was attempting to make them more audible.
 
In regard to the “drop out” of sound, during the
 
Mayor’s singing performance, “the City-owned wireless microphone
 experienced a momentary though noticeable loss of signal or ‘drop
 out’ where the Mayor’s voice was not audible.” Minton believed
 that this “drop out” was caused when the Mayor walked beyond the
 maximum range of the wireless microphone’s transmitter. 
Also during the Mayor’s song, a single guitar input
 
failed due to a defective wall-jack connection caused by the
 additional input demands from the Mayor’s back-up band. Stanley
 testified that as soon as he noticed that he was not hearing the
 guitar in the sound booth, he communicated that to the stage
 crew, which was all he could have done. Minton received
 Stanley’s communication regarding the loss of signal, and
 immediately told Lyons that there was a problem. Lyons walked on
 stage to check the problem, came back to get an extra cable, and
 replaced one of the circuits. Minton explained that it would
 have been “disastrous” to allow the act to go forward without
 fixing the faulty signal for the guitar because “[y]ou have a
 missing performer that the audience is not hearing[.]” 
Lyons testified that he was wearing black clothing, as
 
-11­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stagehands typically do in order to blend into the backdrop. 
Minton and Orias confirmed that Orias had asked all of the crew
 members on the floor to wear a t-shirt with the show logo on it. 
Minton testified that the show was of “appropriate
 
quality” for a “community amateur show.” After the concert, the
 Mayor approached him, shook his hand “and said thank you very
 much, job well done.” The Mayor acknowledged that his custom was
 to “always thank everyone involved.” The Mayor also stated that
 the “glitch” causing the drop-out from his microphone “was the
 only thing that I was aware of that did not go as perfectly as I
 would [have] liked it to have gone,” but despite the glitch,
 “everyone was happy[.]” 
B.
 
1.
 
On August 21, 2007, Orias sent an email to Fuhrmann and
 
Donovan Ahuna, Local 665’s business agent. As the business
 
agent, Ahuna was responsible for representing the union members’
 “interests in discussions and negotiations with employers.” 
In the email, Orias wrote that the sound at the AMM
 
show was “Very Bad,” explaining that there was a high-pitched
 “hissing sound . . . that the sound crew was not able to correct
 to the end,” and a “feedback almost everytime [sic] the center
 mic was used by the pianists to speak.” The same center
 microphone also “cut off and on” several times during a mandolin
 
-12­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
performance. Orias noted that except for the four microphones
 
that the AMM rented from an outside source, all of the equipment
 used for the event belonged to the City. 
In addition, Orias stated that he was “reassured by the
 
crew that the house equipment would be sufficient” and that
 “[t]he hissing and feedback did not happen during the afternoon
 test.” Minton later testified that although he did assure Orias
 that the house equipment was sufficient, he made that statement
 prior to the addition of the Mayor’s back-up band and was not
 referencing the City’s wireless microphones, as he clearly
 informed Orias that the microphones were “not the caliber [Orias]
 needed.” 
Orias concluded his August 21, 2007 email by asking for
 
an explanation of what had happened “from anyone who could lend
 some light” and stating that he had received “a lot of
 unfavorable comments” about the show. Orias did not mention
 Minton or Stanley or any member of the stage crew in his email. 
Orias also did not mention any allegations that members of the
 stage crew were rude or unprofessional. 
Orias later explained that he sent the email although
 
he “knew more or less what was causing” the “glitches” because he
 wanted an official explanation to give the AMM committee, which
 “was asking what happened.” Orias testified that no complaints
 regarding unprofessional conduct involving Minton, Stanley, or
 
-13­  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any member of the stage crew were brought to his attention. 
Ahuna responded to Orias by email that same day, with
 
Furhmann copied on the email. The email attached what appeared
 
to be brief oral statements made by Minton, Stanley, and Ahuna,
 explaining what had happened with the sound during the concert. 
Petitioners testified that they were made aware of Orias’ email
 but did not consider the email to be a personal criticism of
 their work. They both believed that they were only being asked
 to comment on the technical problems with the equipment to
 prevent the same problems from reoccurring. 
Orias replied by email on August 23, 2007, questioning
 
whether it would have been possible for the crew to fix the
 “humming” sound during the show’s intermission by changing the
 wireless microphone to a wire setup. Ahuna responded that “maybe
 it could have been possible,” but “all 16 channel wire-mics
 [were] in use due to the additional band gear.” 
Orias was satisfied with the explanations that were
 
given. It was his belief that the stage crew was not responsible
 for the sound problems. Rather, Orias believed that the stress
 on the house sound system was “just too much, because we ha[d] so
 
many mikes open and the set was old.” Despite the sound
 
problems, Orias considered the event “a good show, . . . people
 
enjoyed it, there was some standing ovation.” 
-14­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2.
 
On August 24, 2007, the Mayor called Fuhrmann and
 
Quintal for a meeting about the show. Fuhrmann explained that he
 
and Quintal “were called to the mayor’s office, . . . and the
 mayor made a complaint,” saying that “he was very unhappy with
 what had happened at the show.” According to Furhmann, the Mayor
 specifically had a problem with Minton and Stanley, mentioning
 that Minton “kept giving him excuses” about the feedback and
 refused to “talk to the sound man and get [the feedback] to be
 stopped.” The Mayor also stated that Minton was “rude and . . .
 improperly dressed” because “he was in a T-shirt on stage in a
 public arena when people could see him[.]” Additionally, the
 Mayor specified that Stanley had remained in the sound booth “and
 wasn’t even hearing what was going on[.]” 
The Mayor confirmed that he “did voice concern of the
 
lack of professionalism that occurred during rehearsal as well as
 the performance,” particularly with regard to Minton. According
 
to the Mayor, however, this was “a very manini thing in the
 
1
things that I do as mayor”  and the discussion of the concert
“probably took two minutes.” 
Quintal assigned Fuhrmann to “investigate” the matter, 
1
 “Manini” is a slang term meaning “small” or “insignificant.”
 
Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/manini (last accessed
November 7, 2013). 
-15­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instructing Fuhrmann, “I need to find out as many of the facts
 
surrounding the incident and the complaints.” At this point,
 neither Minton nor Stanley were aware that the Mayor was involved
 or that the City was conducting an investigation into their work
 at the concert. 
3.
 
On August 30, 2007, the City held an event involving
 
the Mayor, called “The Employees Recognition Program,” at the NBC
 concert hall. On August 28, 2007, Fuhrmann emailed Ahuna to have
 Al Omo, the President of the Local 665 Union, assigned to the
 event in place of Minton and to have another union member
 assigned in place of Stanley. This change was confirmed by an
 August 29, 2007 letter from the City’s Department of Human
 Resources to Ahuna. 
On August 30, 2007, Quintal and Fuhrmann met with Ahuna
 
and Omo. At the conclusion of the meeting, Quintal informed
 Ahuna and Omo that Stanley and Minton were no longer permitted to
 work at the NBC facilities. Fuhrmann testified that “Mr. Quintal
 went through and explained to them what the issues were, what he
 was concerned about, and what his decision had been on the
 matter. That’s basically what was discussed at the meeting.” 
After Quintal explained that Minton and Stanley “would be
 suspended for a while, Mr. Ahuna and Mr. Omo asked how long, and
 Mr. Quintal said he would get back to them on that.” Fuhrmann
 
-16­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that “it wasn’t a very long meeting” and “It wasn’t a
 
real discussion on the situation.” 
On August 31, 2007, Quintal sent a letter to Ahuna “to
 
confirm our discussion yesterday about complaints received from
 the promoter [Orias].” Quintal explained that “the promoter was
 extremely unhappy” with Minton’s and Stanley’s actions and that
 based on his “findings,” they “showed a complete disregard” for
 “customer service and professionalism.” Consequently, Minton and
 Stanley were prohibited from working “at any events” at the NBC
 concert hall, exhibition hall and arena, and the Waikiki Shell:
 
As I conveyed, the promoter was extremely unhappy with
the way he and his event staff and performers were treated
by yo
ur personnel (Eric Minton and Rick Stanley).  I have
 
completed an investigation of these allegations and thank
you for your response to John Furmann’s request for
information from I.A.T.S.E.  You also have a copy of the
 promoter’s email. 
One of the most important areas that we at the
Blaisdell Center concentrate on is customer service and
 professionalism.  If you will recall, I have mentioned this
in previous meeting between myself, John Furmann and your
Board.  Based on my findings, the actions of Mr. Minton and
Mr. Stanley on the night of August 18, 2007 showed a
complete disregard in these areas.  Consequently, both Mr.
Minton and Mr. Stanley will no longer be allowed to work at
any e
vents at the Neal Blaisdell Concert Hall, Exhibition
Hall, Arena, and the Waikiki Shell.
  
(Emphases added).
 
No hearing or meeting with Petitioners was held prior
 
to Quintal’s decision. 
Fuhrmann testified that the “investigation” he
 
conducted at Quintal’s direction consisted of speaking to Orias
 
once on the phone, reviewing Orias’ email, and sending a letter
 
-17­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to the Local 665 union and reviewing their response.2 Furhmann
 
testified that he did not realize, until informed at his July 6,
 
2009 deposition, that the stage crew’s attire, specifically the
 t-shirts, were provided by Orias. Additionally, Fuhrmann
 testified that he was not present at the AMM concert, and as of
 the date of his deposition, he had never listened to or viewed a
 reproduction of the show. Quintal testified that he was not
 aware that Fuhrmann did not, as part of his investigation, review
 the DVD of the performance. 
Fuhrmann did not make a written report of his
 
“investigation.” Quintal testified that he did not think it was
 strange to not have a written report because he and Fuhrmann “sat
 down and we discussed all of the aspects of the situation.” 
Fuhrmann, on the other hand, stated that “there was no real
 discussion about that issue. Did we discuss back and forth
 whether this [ban] should happen? No.” Fuhrmann reiterated that
 Quintal did not ask for his input before instituting the ban
 against Minton and Stanley. 
For his part, Quintal testified that he was also not
 
2
 It is unclear from the record whether Fuhrmann was referring to
 
Ahuna’s responsive email to Orias, which Furhmann received a copy of, or
whether Furhmann was referring to a separate response from the union to his
“letter.”  The record, however, does not contain either Furhmann’s letter or
the union’s response to such a letter.  Ahuna also did not reference either
 document in his emails to Orias and in his letter to Quintal after the ban was
instituted. 
-18­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
present at the concert. At the time he sent the August 31
 
letter, he had watched only a portion of the movie of the
 concert, showing Lyons walking on the stage. He did not consult
 anyone other than Fuhrmann on whether it was inappropriate for a
 stagehand to walk on the stage to repair a lost connection. 
Quintal testified that he was “satisfied that in [Fuhrmann’s]
 opinion . . . the action . . . could have been done in a more
 subtle manner, perhaps in between the numbers, but certainly not
 during an act.” At the time he wrote the August 31 letter, he
 was not aware of Nephi’s interactions with the stage crew at the
 rehearsals and the concert. 
On September 3, 2007, Ahuna informed Minton and Stanley
 
of Quintal’s decision to ban them from working at the NBC and the
 Waikiki Shell. This was the first time that Minton and Stanley
 were made aware of the City’s investigation into their conduct at
 the concert. 
Stanley was scheduled to begin working at a long-term
 
position on The Lion King show at the NBC concert hall the next
 day. The Lion King show was planned to run for two to three
 months. Stanley testified that he had “substantiated several
 times with the business agent” that he would work on the show for
 its entire run. However, as a result of the ban, Stanley was not
 allowed to work on the show. The president of an employee
 leasing company in Honolulu testified that the stagehand who was
 
-19­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
hired to work in the same position as Stanley earned $19,280.63
 
for working on the show, at an hourly rate of $24.82 for regular
 time and $37.23 for overtime. 
On September 4, 2007, Ahuna replied by letter to
 
Quintal, protesting that Quintal’s “unilateral action to prohibit
 two of my members from performing work at City and County of
 Honolulu venues is simply wrong.” He expressed his understanding
 that the “quality of the sound system and the movement and
 coordination of the sidemen for the Mayor’s portion of the
 program appears to be the principle [sic] complaint against my
 members.” He explained that these problems were caused by
 several factors, including “the fact that the promoter . . . did
 not make the necessary provisions for the type of system which
 was needed to accommodate the Mayor’s performance with a back up
 band.” In addition, “the promoter failed to schedule a sound
 check prior to the performance[,]” and the union members were not
 informed of the Mayor’s rehearsal the night before the show. 
Ahuna also wrote, “One of the critical issues here is
 
that the Mayor’s brother made mention on several occasions that
 he wanted a PA system like that used by the Society of Seven for
 their shows.” However, the City’s sound system “falls way short
 of what was being requested.” The union members “suggested to
 the event coordinator that perhaps they should consider
 supplementing the City’s system with professional sound equipment
 
-20­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
rental which would accommodate the vision as expressed by the
 
Mayor’s brother[.]” 
Ahuna’s letter concluded by asking Quintal to consider
 
“temporarily suspend[ing]” his decision “for a period of at least
 2 weeks” and holding an “immediate meeting to discuss this matter
 in greater detail,” given the “differing perceptions on what went
 wrong[.]” Ahuna’s letter also attached statements by Stanley,
 Lyons and a third stagehand who had worked at the event. 
Stanley’s statement explained the reasons for the occasional
 feedback during the performance. 
The parties stipulated at trial that there was “no
 
indication that either of the plaintiffs . . . specifically
 authorized or did not authorize Mr. Ahuna or the union to . . .
 write the response letter on their behalf.” Despite Ahuna’s
 request that Quintal defer the effective date of the ban pending
 a meeting, Quintal’s ban became effective immediately. 
Minton worked at an event for Hawai' i Pacific 
University (HPU) on August 16, 2007 at the NBC concert hall, 
prior to Quintal’s ban. HPU’s coordinator sent an email to 
Fuhrmann on September 4, 2007, thanking him for the work that had 
been done and specifically identifying and thanking Minton for 
his “expert advice and consultation.” Minton testified that 
-21­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
another HPU event was planned for later in 2007 but that he was
 
unable to work at the event due to the City’s ban. 
On September 6, 2007, a representative of the Hawai' i 
State Teachers Association (HSTA) wrote to Ahuna, requesting Minton and Stanley to work at an event to be held on October 8, 2007 at the NBC arena. She wrote that Minton and Stanley “are excellent workers and know the requirements of the job[.]” The representative later told Minton that she was unable to hire him because of the City’s ban. 
Minton testified that once he discovered that the City
 
was involved, he attempted to contact City officials himself. On
 September 7, 2007, Minton sent a letter to Quintal regarding
 Quintal’s August 31, 2007 letter. Minton wrote that he was
 “extremely aggrieved by statements” in Quintal’s letter. He
 wrote, “I formally state that I performed in a professional
 manner to insure, first personnel safety, second protection of
 the facility equipment, and then the protection of rented
 equipment, to present the best event possible[.]” Quintal
 confirmed that he received the letter, but he did not respond
 because he “felt it was best” to communicate with Ahuna. 
On September 11, 2007, Minton and Stanley sent a joint
 
letter to Quintal objecting to the actions taken. There is no
 indication in the record that Quintal responded to this letter. 
-22­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
On October 2, 2007, Quintal wrote a memorandum to file,
 
explaining the actions that had been taken thus far. He wrote
 
that his decision to ban Minton and Stanley was based on their
 “demeanor” at the event. Specifically, they failed to “portray a
 level of customer service and professionalism that would be
 expected from individuals with over thirty-five years of
 experience.” According to Quintal, the problem with the event
 was not “that equipment was not on par or that the act did not
 coordinate last minute changes properly.” Rather, the issue was
 “the ‘way’ these two individuals responded to requests for
 assistance from the promoter and act participants as well, that
 has caused this action to be known.” 
Quintal further wrote that “[t]o date, no apology has
 
been submitted on behalf of IATSE or the individuals involved.” 
Regarding the permanence of his decision, Quintal wrote, “Rather
 than a permanent work restriction, I have since indicated that I
 would reconsider their participation at Blaisdell or Shell events
 after a nine month term.” The memorandum provided that Fuhrmann
 had communicated Quintal’s reconsideration to Ahuna. 
On October 5, 2007, Fuhrmann responded to a request by 
the Hawai' i Catholic Schools to have Minton and Stanley work at 
an event scheduled for February 1, 2008 at the NBC arena. After discussing the request with Fuhrmann, Quintal instructed Fuhrmann
 
-23­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to inform the organization that Minton and Stanley were not
 
allowed to work at the NBC facilities. Fuhrmann complied,
 
informing Hawai' i Catholic Schools that Minton and Stanley “are 
not presently permitted to work in the facilities of the [NBC]”
 
and advising them to have the union provide “two other qualified
 
stage hands.” Hawai' i Catholic Schools responded by asking 
Furhmann to reconsider and permit Minton and Stanley to work at
 
the event, given their history of working together. 
Two months after the ban had been imposed by Quintal,
 
in a letter to the Mayor dated November 2, 2007 and stamped
 received on November 26, 2007, the emcees for the event
 complained generally about the technical support and sound
 quality at the concert.
3
 
C.
 
Petitioners filed their complaint in circuit court on
 
December 13, 2007. The complaint alleged that Quintal and
 Fuhrman had acted as agents of the City, and had abused their
 authority “through their wrongful, tortious and illegal
 conduct[.]” Petitioners also alleged that Respondents denied
 them due process by “blacklist[ing]” them from working at the
 
3
 The letter was not received into evidence during the trial,
 
although there was some testimony referencing the letter.  Counsel for the
 
City later represented to the circuit court that despite writing the letter,
Sprinkle “did not want to be involved in the matter.”  The emcees did not
 specifically identify Minton or Stanley in their letter.   
-24­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
City’s facilities without “a deprivation hearing . . . and/or the
 
right to contest” the action. “In the exercise of reasonable
 care, [the City] should have cancelled and overruled . . .
 Quintal’s and Fuhrmann’s illegal directives,” but “failed to
 correct, rectify and rescind” them. Petitioners alleged that
 “Quintal’s and Furhmann’s illegal directives and Defendants’
 failures to rescind them have interfered with Plaintiffs’
 prospective advantage, prospective business relationships and
 contracts with producers.” As a result, “Plaintiffs have been
 deprived of work for various producers, have lost income and have
 lost the intense enjoyment working in their occupation and
 profession ordinarily brought them.” 
Petitioners sought “[p]reliminary and permanent
 
mandatory injunctions, together with other equitable relief,”
 requiring the City to immediately “rescind the blacklisting,
 [and] notify the producers of its illegality[.]” In addition,
 Petitioners sought a judgment against Respondents, jointly and
 severally, for general and special damages, punitive and
 exemplary damages, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. 
On December 24, 2007, Petitioners filed a Motion for
 
Preliminary Injunction against Respondents. The memorandum in
 support of the motion stated that “[b]ecause the vast majority of
 theatrical, concert and event productions performed in Honolulu
 are situated at the City facilities from which the Plaintiffs
 
-25­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
have been banned, they have essentially been put out of work.” 
In addition, the memorandum noted that Petitioners would “suffer
 irreparable injury because the extent of their lost income will
 not be provable, since it is difficult to project what employment
 would have been granted them by different employers but for the
 ban” and “producers usually hire the same crews they used for
 their last productions.” 
The City filed its Answer to the Complaint on January
 
3, 2008 and its Memorandum in Opposition to the Motion for
 Preliminary Injunction on January 4, 2008. The City contended in
 opposition to the Motion for Preliminary Injunction that
 Petitioners were not blacklisted; “[r]ather, the City notified
 the Plaintiffs’ union that Plaintiffs would no longer be
 permitted to work at City-owned facilities due to unprofessional
 behavior which they exhibited while working at a City facility.” 
According to the City, “This behavior caused alarm to the
 individuals to whom it was directed and the actions taken against
 Plaintiffs were taken in order to prevent similar incidents from
 occurring again.” The City emphasized that Petitioners were not
 City employees, “so any action allegedly taken against them, was
 at the hands of their union, not the City.” 
The hearing on the Motion for Preliminary Injunction
 
-26­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
was held on January 14 and 15, 2008.4 The court considered as
 
evidence the various correspondence exchanged between Ahuna,
 
Orias, Quintal, and Minton.5
 
Fuhrmann testified on behalf of the City, and stated
 
that the decision to blacklist Minton and Stanley “was [a]
 response not so much to the technical problems of the show as it
 was the approach.” He further explained, “The complaint was
 about the individuals not taking action to deal with the show and
 to not respond to the tenants. They [the AMM] were concerned
 about their appearance on the show since they were seen in the
 public; they were not dressed . . . in what we consider a public
 manner.” According to Fuhrmann, the issue was that Lyons wore a
 T-shirt. He stated that he never spoke directly with Minton or
 Stanley during his “investigation” but “had their written side of
 the story.”
 
Fuhramnn testified that the decision to ban Minton and
 
Stanley was made by Quintal. However, in response to questions
 
4 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.  The transcript of the
 
hearing was made part of the record of the trial.  The circuit court took
 
judicial notice of the transcript. 
5
 The correspondence included: 1) 8/21/07 emails between Ahuna and
 
Orias regarding sound problems at the event; 2) 8/31/07 letter from Quintal to
Ahuna informing Ahuna of Quintal’s decision to ban Petitioners; 3) 9/4/07
Ahuna reply letter to Quintal regarding ban, with attachments; 4) 10/26/07
letter from Minton to Mayor; 5) 10/26/07 Counsel for Petitioners’ letter to
Quintal asking for immediate withdrawal of directive; 6) 11/2/07 letter from
emcees to Mayor; 7) 12/10/07 Ahuna letter to Quintal informing Quintal that
Petitioners had retained counsel and the union’s involvement was limited. 
-27­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
posed by the court, Fuhrmann testified that the Mayor was
 
“consulted” and agreed with Quintal’s decision.6
 
Quintal also testified at the hearing. Like Fuhrmann,
 
Quintal testified that the reason for his decision was not
 necessarily the “technical aspects” of the show but “the demeanor
 and the response from the plaintiffs in dealing with the
 customers who were asking them for their professional support[.]” 
In regard to Minton’s “demeanor,” Quintal explained that “Minton
 did not get off his chair, he did not move, he just sat there.” 
Quintal further explained that Minton “responded negatively” to
 certain requests and “allowed another employee to work on stage
 behind the Mayor to [work] on the alleged technical difficulties,
 causing . . . a gap in the sound[.]” 
Quintal acknowledged that he did not have any special
 
training as a theatrical production expert, and his only
 knowledge, particularly with respect to the propriety of
 permitting a sound technician to go on stage during a
 performance, came from watching performances as an audience
 member. Quintal did not know why Minton sent Lyons on stage and
 testified that he did not “feel it was necessary” to know. 
6
 When the Mayor was later asked about Furhmann’s testimony at his
 
deposition, he testified, “No, I did not approve the action.”  Minton
 
testified at trial that he did not learn of the Mayor’s involvement until the
preliminary injunction hearing. 
-28­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In regard to Stanley, Quintal testified that Stanley
 
“did not come out of the sound booth or come down to address the
 
problem during the performance[.]” Quintal explained that during
 his “investigation,” “it was implied and . . . conveyed” to him
 that if there were sound problems, either the Mayor or Jeff
 
7
Coelho  “wanted [Stanley] to come down so that he could see
firsthand what the problems were with the sound.” 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the court orally
 
granted Petitioners’ Motion for Preliminary Injunction. 
The
 
court commented that there were no “threats of violence, or
 profanity,” or anything of that nature that prompted the City’s
 ban. Rather, “[t]here were glitches that could have been
 avoided” if the union members “had been invited perhaps to the
 two full rehearsals[.]” Additionally, the court stated that it
 seemed that the City’s action was “overreaching . . .
 particularly when we are talking about the livelihoods [of] many
 people.” Thus, this was “an action that cannot be allowed to
 continue.” 
The court’s written order granting the preliminary
 
injunction was filed on January 23, 2008. 
7
 Fuhrmann testified at the hearing that Coelho was present with the
 
Mayor backstage and “is a person that’s been in radio and doing shows for
probably 20 something, 30 years.” 
  
-29­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In June 2008, the City installed a new sound system at
 
the NBC concert hall. According to Quintal, the new sound system
 
had “been in the works for almost six years” prior to that. 
On January 21, 2010, Respondents filed a Motion for
 
Partial Summary Judgment on the Plaintiffs’ Due Process Claim. 
The question to be decided by the motion was whether the City
 denied Petitioners due process of law when Quintal barred them
 from working at City-owned and operated facilities.
8 On March
 
19, 2010, the circuit court entered its order denying the Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment.
9
 
D.
 
A jury-waived trial was held on April 12, 14, 15 and
 
16, 2010. 
Minton testified that during the period of time between 
the City’s ban and the court’s injunction, eighty percent of his previously available work was no longer available. Other than the NBC facilities, the only other “real house” is the Hawai' i 
Theater, which is “non-union.” Thus, he had “just a tiny percentage of [his] business available[.]” Minton explained that 
8
 Respondents argued that due process was satisfied because
 
Petitioners and Ahuna, their union representative, had knowledge of the nature
of the complaints regarding the show and were given an opportunity to respond
in Ahuna’s August 21, 2007 email to Orias and September 4, 2007 letter to
Quintal.  
9
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.  
-30­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the other venues the City alleged were available to him during
 
the ban were not actually available. For example, several of the
 venues were school facilities that for the most part hired
 students rather than professionals, and were “insignificant as
 far as professional theater.” He had also never worked at
 several of the theaters referenced by the City. 
Minton also testified that he had nearly exhausted his
 
union pension fund due to his lost income and that he had no
 other significant assets. He had taken any work that was offered
 to him through the union since he was blacklisted. Minton
 explained that he did not seek work outside the union’s referral
 system because he had taken an oath upon joining the union that
 he would not seek any non-union work. 
Stanley testified that prior to the blacklisting, his
 
reputation was “[e]xcellent.” However, after Quintal’s August
 31, 2007 letter, his reputation was “blown to hell.” Stanley
 further testified that the amount of work he had been able to get
 since the blacklisting was “severely reduced,” about “a tenth to
 a quarter” of the work he had been able to get before the
 blacklisting. 
Orias testified that in his experience, Minton and
 
Stanley were both always “[p]olite and courteous.” He had never
 received any complaints about either Minton or Stanley. He
 
-31­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
testified that if he had the opportunity to do another
 
production, he would choose Minton and Stanley to work for him. 
Sean Christensen, a line technician and member of the
 
Local 665 Union for approximately twenty years, testified that he
 had previously served as vice-president and trustee of the union.
 In his view, the City’s ban “became common knowledge throughout
 the industry.” He estimated that he spoke in-person to twenty to
 thirty union members about the ban. 
Christensen testified that Minton was “considered very
 
highly . . . amongst his peers.” Minton’s reputation as a union
 secretary and treasurer prior to the ban “was outstanding.” 
Minton was “widely respected not only within our own local, but
 within the international, so he was well thought of and very,
 very skilled and knowledgeable in his duties and responsibilities
 in that office.” In Christensen’s opinion, the ban “impacted
 [Minton] adversely, because he was not allowed to work, and it
 reflected negatively on his capacity and his career.” 
Christensen testified that he had also known Stanley
 
for about twenty-five years. Stanley’s reputation as a stagehand
 prior to the ban was “exemplary,” and Stanley “used to be known
 as the sound guy in that house.” After the ban, Stanley’s work
 calls went to different people and he stopped getting the calls
 that he had been given in the past. 
Christensen further testified that although other jobs
 
-32­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
at non-City venues are technically available, “primarily most of
 
their [Petitioners’] work was done at the City venues, either the
 Shell, the arena or the Blaisdell complex.” He “definitely”
 agreed that Minton and Stanley “specialized in events that have
 large audiences and large theaters.” He estimated that although
 Minton and Stanley had worked at the Stan Sheriff Center, Aloha
 Stadium and other outdoor venues, about ninety percent of their
 work came from the NBC facilities and the Shell. To his
 knowledge, no other member of the union had ever been banned from
 working by the City. 
Thomas Loudat, Ph.D., testified regarding Minton and
 
Stanley’s lost income as a result of the ban. He was originally
 retained by the City to evaluate Minton’s and Stanley’s lost
 income, but the parties reached a mutual agreement that he would
 perform the calculations for both sides. The parties stipulated
 that Dr. Loudat was “an expert in economics” and would be
 “permitted to render any and all opinions that would relate to
 that expertise.” 
Dr. Loudat explained that his typical procedure was to
 
gather case-specific information such as tax returns and benefits
 information from the union. He would then use that information
 to “specify or show what the nature of the earnings of the
 individuals had been historically,” in order to project what the
 individuals would have earned “but for the incident.” He also
 
-33­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
factored in “general economic conditions” and long-term “trends”
 
for jobs in the relevant sector. He testified that Petitioners’
 income had remained constant over a long period of time, in spite
 of a “gradual downtrend” in the “arts and entertainment sector of
 the Honolulu economy.” Dr. Loudat’s calculations did not account
 for any specific events, such as The Lion King show, which
 Petitioners may have worked at if not for the ban. The
 calculations were based “solely on the historic average,” with
 adjustments due to “economic conditions.” 
Based on his analysis, Dr. Loudat produced reports on
 
Minton’s and Stanley’s projected lifetime loss of earnings.  He
 
concluded that Stanley’s total pay loss after 2007 amounted to
 
$405,000, which was comprised of $266,000 in compensation loss,
 $109,000 in Federal income tax on that amount, and $30,000 in
 State income tax on that amount. He concluded that between
 August 18, 2007 and January 14, 2008, the date of the preliminary
 injunction hearing, Stanley’s lost earnings amounted to $2,653. 
Using the same analysis, Dr. Loudat concluded that
 
Minton’s total pay loss after 2007 amounted to $329,000 ($219,000
 compensation loss). He concluded that between August 18, 2007
 and January 14, 2008, Minton’s lost earnings amounted to $4,058. 
In addition to the testimony referenced above, Quintal
 
testified that after he wrote the letter banning Minton and
 Stanley, he “chatted with the Mayor with regards to . . .
 
-34­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
allowing them to return.” According to Quintal, “I said there’s
 
a possibility that if we can work things out with the union going
 forward, I would reconsider my decision.” 
Quintal testified that he did not communicate to Minton
 
and Stanley that he would “back off,” or communicate with them at
 all during the process of banning them and then reconsidering. 
He communicated only with Ahuna, informing Ahuna that he would
 
reconsider his decision if the union made a “more concerted
 
effort in educating . . . members” working at the City’s
 
facilities. 
Quintal reiterated that “the real basis” for his
 
decision to ban Minton and Stanley was “customer service and
 
professionalism.” He stated, “in part of my conducting my
 investigation with folks, I was led to believe that there was
 some personal feelings about arrogance, some rudeness, some
 inconsiderations.” He attributed these comments to Jeff Coelho,
 “statements from Gary Sprinkle,” and “discussions with John
 Furhmann over his discussions about what had happened” with
 Ahuna. 
Respondents’ counsel confirmed the City’s position that
 
its legal authority for the ban arose from Section 6-702 of the
 Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu (RCCCH), which
 grants the director of the DES the authority to “operate and
 
-35­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
maintain” DES facilities and to “perform such other duties as may
 
be required by law.” 
E.
 
The circuit court entered its Findings of Fact;
 
Conclusions of Law and Order on October 28, 2010. 
First, the circuit court found that as members of the
 
IATSE, Petitioners “are for all intents and purposes ‘free
 agents’ who engage in their trade without any contractual
 obligations or rights relative to the City.” The court thus
 found “the decision to ban Plaintiffs was a legitimate exercise
 of the City’s authority to prescribe conditions for the use of .
 . . the NBC.” 
In regard to the nature of the City’s investigation,
 
the court found that “Quintal assigned Furhamnn to investigate
 the complaints and concerns raised” by Orias, the Mayor, and the
 event emcees, and that this investigation “included input from
 Minton and Stanley.” Although the court acknowledged that
 “Fuhrmann at no point had direct contact or communication with
 either Minton and Stanley” during the course of his
 investigation, the court found that under the circumstances, “it
 was reasonable for the City to raise and discuss any concerns
 related to the August 18, 2007 show with the union.” 
-36­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The court found that “although [Petitioners] were not
 
formally provided with an exhaustive list” of the “complaints and
 
issues raised in connection with the poor quality of the show,”
 nevertheless Petitioners, “through their union representatives,
 were generally provided with notice.” The court reasoned that
 both Minton and Stanley were aware of Orias’ August 21, 2007
 email, and “through their union representatives, were provided
 with an opportunity to submit information concerning the
 complaints.” The court therefore found that “[t]he overall
 process provided by Quintal, Fuhrmann and the City consisted of
 meaningful notice of the complaints against Minton and Stanley;
 [and] contained an opportunity for Minton and Stanley, by and
 through their business agent and union representatives, to
 respond to the complaints against them[.]” The court further
 found that the “overall process” “contained a deliberative
 decision-making process that was reasonably based upon
 information provided by the parties herein.” 
Regarding Petitioners’ right to work at and access the
 
City’s facilities, the court entered a finding that “it is clear
 
that Plaintiffs have no constitutionally-protected right, no
 
contract-based right, no city, state or federal statutory right,
 nor any other cognizable legal right or entitlement to ply their
 chosen profession as stage/theater workers at City-owned venues.” 
-37­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***
 As to the effect of the ban on Minton and Stanley’s
 
ability to continue working, the court found that Petitioners
 
remained “completely free to perform their respective trades at
 City venues (other than the NBC or Waikiki Shell), as well as, at
 non-City venues.” The court found that “[w]hile both Minton and
 Stanley certainly have a long history, practice and expectation
 of traditionally working certain recurring events or those put on
 by certain promoters or groups, neither Minton nor Stanley
 provided adequate proof that they had any existing” or
 prospective “contract with any party which was interfered with”
 due to Respondents’ actions. As such, the court found that
 Petitioners’ claim that the ban “resulted in significant economic
 losses to them” was “speculative since it is based largely upon
 their expectation that they would have worked many, if not all,
 of the events that they either had previously worked or for which
 they would have been otherwise eligible and available to do so.” 
Based on the above findings, the court made a series of
 
“alternative” conclusions. First, the court concluded that
 Petitioners “failed to present credible evidence that a
 constitutionally-protected property interest was denied them,”
 and therefore Petitioners’ “due process . . . and state
 constitutional claims fail.” 
“In the alternative,” the court concluded that Quintal
 
and Fuhrmann were entitled to qualified immunity regarding the
 
-38­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
federal and constitutional claims and to conditional privilege on
 
the state law claims. Thus, judgment on those claims was entered
 
in their favor. 
“In the second alternative,” the court concluded that
 
Minton and Stanley failed to prove that they were denied due
 
process of law. The court concluded in this regard that Minton
 and Stanley received “adequate notice for purposes of due
 process,” “both directly and through their union representatives,
 as to the complaints stemming from the August 18, 2007 event,”
 and Respondents provided “a meaningful process to challenge the
 complaints[.]” 
The court further concluded under its “alternative”
 
ruling that Petitioners “failed to present credible evidence to
 establish that they had existing or prospective contractual
 
rights with Catholic Schools of Hawai' i and/or [HPU].” “In the 
alternative, Plaintiffs failed to present credible evidence that 
any Defendant interfered with any existing or prospective contractual right or any existing or prospective business advantage.” The court also concluded that “Plaintiffs had no contract with the City and thus, have no enforceable contract or other rights to work at any City-owned venues, including the NBC and the Waikiki Shell.” The court consequently entered judgment 
-39­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
in favor of Respondents “as to claims predicated upon these
 
theories.” 
The court therefore entered judgment in favor of
 
Respondents and against Petitioners on all claims in the
 complaint and rescinded the order granting Petitioners’ Motion
 for Preliminary Injunction.
 
II.
 
A.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Petitioners raised thirty points
 
of error challenging the circuit court’s findings of fact and
 conclusions of law. In relevant part, the ICA consolidated
 Petitioners’ points of error into two claims that the circuit
 court erred in entering its judgment because 1) the ban on
 Petitioners was not authorized by statute or regulation; and 2)
 the ban was a denial of procedural due process.
10
 
Minton v. Quintal, No. CAAP-11-0000317, 2012 WL 5970950, at *2
 (Haw. App. Nov. 29, 2012) (memo.).
 
With respect to the first issue, Petitioners argued
 
that government officials may not interfere with private
 employment decisions without explicit statutory authority to do
 
10
 Petitioners also argued that the City’s ban was arbitrary and
 
capricious.  The ICA rejected this argument based on its determination that
Petitioners failed to demonstrate a liberty or property interest.   Minton,
 
2012 WL 5970950, at *4.  In light of our ruling upon the issue of procedural
due process, we do not further address this point of error. 
-40­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
so. In this case, the City relied solely on RCCCH § 6-702, which
 
Petitioners argued “is far from the explicit grant of authority
 to overrule private employers’ staffing decisions” because
 “[o]perating and maintaining a building does not normally even
 implicitly entail the power to decide whom a lessee may employ.” 
In response, Respondents maintained that the Director’s authority
 to operate and maintain DES facilities was a sufficient legal
 basis for suspending Petitioners’ access to the facilities. 
In regard to the second issue, Petitioners contended
 
that their rights to procedural due process were violated. 
Petitioners argued that a liberty interest was implicated in this
 case, where access to publicly-owned facilities was denied,
 eligibility for employment was formally denied, the City’s action
 interfered with Petitioners’ relationship with third parties, and
 finding replacement work was not possible because large shows for
 which Petitioners’ services were required were held at the NBC
 and Waikiki Shell. Petitioners asserted that they were denied
 procedural due process prior to the deprivation of their liberty
 interest, as the “only pre-deprivation notice” they received was
 from Orias, which was “extremely misleading” because it “looked
 like a simple inquiry.” They argued that the full extent of the
 Respondents’ accusations was never communicated to them. 
Relatedly, Petitioners argued that the circuit court
 
erred in concluding and finding that they failed to provide
 
-41­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
adequate proof of Respondents’ interference with existing or
 
prospective contracts, and also erred in finding that any claims
 of economic losses as a result of the ban was “speculative.” 
Respondents countered that Petitioners failed to
 
establish a constitutionally protected liberty interest. [AB at
 15] Respondents contended that “an employee must have no
 capacity to practice his or her career at all” and the employee’s
 termination must be accompanied “by stigmatizing charges[.]” 
(Quotation marks omitted). In this case, Petitioners “could
 still work at other events at other publicly and privately owned
 venues,” and the reasons for banning Petitioners were not
 publicized. 
Even assuming that Petitioners established a liberty
 
interest, Respondents argued that they “provided constitutionally
 adequate due process prior to” the decision to institute the ban. 
Alternatively, Respondents maintained that due process is not
 required in cases involving the termination of an at-will
 employee, who is subject to termination without any explanation. 
B.
 
The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s judgment, holding
 
that 1) Respondents had inherent authority to suspend Petitioners
 from DES facilities; and 2) Petitioners failed to demonstrate a
 property or liberty interest in working at the DES facilities. 
Minton, 2012 WL 5970950, at *2-4. 
-42­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
First, the ICA held that “[t]he authority to suspend
 
persons from DES’s facilities is inherent and necessarily
 
incidental to the operation and maintenance of those facilities.” 
Id. The ICA interpreted RCCCH § 6-702 “as conferring upon the
 
director the ability to exclude persons as necessary to the
 operations and management of the DES’s facilities.”
11 Id. 
Second, the ICA held that Petitioners failed to
 
demonstrate that they had “a liberty interest in being allowed to
 work at DES’s facilities.” Id. at *3-4. A liberty interest was
 
not implicated when a person “‘is not rehired in one job but
 remains as free as before to seek another.’” Id. at *3 (quoting
 
Bd. of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 575
 (1972)). Rather, in order “[t]o prove constitutional injury, one
 must show that the government has worked some change in his
 status under law, sufficient to implicate a liberty interest.” 
Id. 
Applying this standard, the ICA concluded that
 
Petitioners “did not demonstrate that the government’s action
 constrained [their] future employment opportunities to a
 
11
 The ICA further held that Quintal’s decision to ban Petitioners 
did not constitute rule-making and thus was not subject to the requirements of
the Hawai 'i Administrative Procedures Act (HAPA), HRS Chapter 91 and RCCCH §
4-105 (requiring notice and hearing for rules and regulations).  Id. The ICA 
reasoned that HAPA does not apply to decisions relating to the “internal
management of an agency,” and RCCCH § 4-105 only applies to rules andregulations affecting the public.  Id. 
-43­ 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
sufficient degree to constitute a status change of due process
 
import.” Id. at *4. The court reasoned that the City’s ban “in
 
no way prescribes Appellants’ rights to practice their profession
 in the private sector, nor does it impair Appellants’ eligibility
 for public employment at any other venue.” Id. Thus, the ICA
 
concluded that the City’s ban did not implicate Petitioners’ due
 process interests. Id. 
The ICA therefore affirmed the circuit court’s
 
judgment. Id. 
III.
 
In their application for writ of certiorari to this
 
court, Petitioners raised three questions for review: 1) whether
 Quintal had “the explicit authority to exercise unbridled
 discretion” to prohibit Petitioners from working at City
 facilities without affording them due process; 2) whether
 Quintal’s action interfered with Petitioners’ property interest
 in their employer-employee and union-member relationships; and 3)
 whether Quintal’s action abridged Petitioners’ liberty interest
 in working in their chosen profession. 
-44­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV. 
A.
 
“We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the 
case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the 
right/wrong standard.” Brown v. Thompson, 91 Hawai 'i 1, 8, 979 
P.2d 586, 593 (1999) (quotation marks and citations omitted). 
B.
 
Findings of fact will not be disturbed unless clearly
erroneous.  A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when,
despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court
is left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing
the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. 
We review the trial court's conclusions of law de novo under
 
the right/wrong standard.  Under this standard, we examine
the facts and answer the question without being required to
give any weight to the trial court's answer to it.  Thus, a
conclusion of law is not binding upon the appellate court
and is freely reviewable for its correctness.
 
Brown, 91 Hawai' i at 8, 979 P.2d at 593 (quotation marks, 
brackets, ellipses and citations omitted). 
V. 
The City’s primary defense to its actions in this case
 
is that the City’s ban was authorized as a proper exercise of its
 
power to manage and maintain its facilities. Accordingly, we
 address the issues raised by Petitioners’ application in the
 following order: 1) whether the City had the authority to ban
 Petitioners in the first instance; 2) assuming the City had such
 
-45­  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
authority, whether the ban satisfied the requirements of the
 
Hawai'i Constitution; and 3) if the ban was not constitutionally 
sufficient and therefore cannot be justified as part of the
 
City’s authority to manage and maintain its facilities, whether
 Petitioners’ tortious interference claims were properly decided
 by the circuit court. 
The first issue raised by Petitioners’ application is
 
whether Quintal had the authority to prohibit Petitioners from
 working at the City’s facilities without affording them due
 process. 
RCCCH § 2-101 (2001) provides that the “city shall have
 
and may exercise all powers necessary for local self­government.”
12 The Director of the DES, pursuant to RCCCH § 6­
702 (2001), is granted the authority to “operate and maintain”
 DES facilities, which includes the NBC and the Waikiki Shell. 
12 The city’s authority under RCCCH § 2-101 is “subject only to the 
general laws of this state allocating and reallocating powers and functions
pursuant to Article 8, Section 2” of the Hawai 'i Constitution. 
The constitution provides in relevant part: 
Each political subdivision shall have the power to frame and
adopt a charter for its own self-government within such
limits and under such procedures as may be provided by
general law.  Such procedures, however, shall not require
the approval of a charter by a legislative body.
 
Charter provisions with respect to a political subdivision's
executive, legislative and administrative structure and
organization shall be superior to statutory provisions,
subject to the authority of the legislature to enact general
laws allocating and reallocating powers and functions.
 
Haw. Const. art. VIII, § 2. 
-46­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
As the ICA held, the authority to prohibit persons from
 
DES facilities is an inherent part of the DES Director’s
 
authority to manage and maintain DES facilities. Minton, 2012 WL
 
5970950, at *2. See Holdman v. Olim, 59 Haw. 346, 355, 581 P.2d
 
1164, 1170 (1978) (“The State, no less than a private owner of
 property, has power to preserve the property under its control
 for the use to which it is lawfully dedicated.”) (quotation marks
 and citation omitted). See also Nakamoto v. Fasi, 64 Haw. 17,
 
22, 635 P.2d 946, 951 (1981) (“The City is free to adopt and
 enforce reasonable rules restricting the time and manner of use
 of its premises, for members of the public do not have the
 absolute and unfettered right to enter to make use of a City-
owned facility.”). 
For example, if an individual poses a security concern
 
to the DES facilities or to those using such facilities, then the
 City has the inherent authority to prohibit the individual from
 entering the premises. However, the City’s authority to prohibit
 individuals from entering or using DES facilities is not
 unlimited. Rather, the City must, at a minimum, act within the
 limits of the state constitution. Cf. Nakamoto, 64 Haw. at 25,
 
635 P.2d at 954 (“The City is entitled to take necessary steps to
 prevent the misuse of its premises, and to provide protection for
 those whom it invites to its facilities. It may not, however,
 impose conditions for their use which are so unreasonable as to
 
-47­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
be violative of constitutional provisions.”); State v. Bloss, 64
 
Haw. 148, 637 P.2d 1117 (1981) (city ordinance regulating
 peddling in public places was unconstitutional regulation of
 protected commercial speech and unconstitutionally vague and
 ambiguous).
 
Thus, the City is not permitted to exercise its 
authority to manage its facilities in a manner that would be in 
derogation of an individual’s rights under the Hawai' i 
Constitution. 
VI.
 
The second issue raised by Petitioners in this
 
application is whether the City’s action implicated Petitioners’
 
property or liberty interest, thereby invoking the protections of
 procedural due process, and if so, whether the City’s action
 satisfied the fundamental due process requirements of notice and
 an opportunity to be heard. 
The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution provide that no 
person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law. U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1; Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. “The requirement of procedural due process exists to protect individuals against the state’s deprivation of liberty 
and property interests.” Brown, 91 Hawai' i at 9, 979 P.2d at 
-48­ 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
594. Procedural due process claims are addressed in two steps:
 
“First, we must determine whether a ‘liberty’ or ‘property’
 
interest has been interfered with by the State; second, we must
 determine what specific procedures are required to satisfy due
 
process.” State v. Bani, 97 Hawai' i 285, 293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 
(2001). 
A.
 
The liberty interest guaranteed by the Due Process
 
Clause denotes, “[w]ithout doubt, . . . the right of the
 
individual . . . to engage in any of the common occupations of
 life[.]” Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 399 (1923). “It
 
requires no argument to show that the right to work for a living
 in the common occupations of the community is of the very essence
 of the personal freedom and opportunity that it was the purpose
 of the [Due Process Clause] to secure.” Truax v. Raich, 239 U.S.
 
33, 41 (1915).  See Martin v. Mem’l Hosp., 130 F.3d 1143, 1148
 
(5th Cir. 1997) (“The Due Process Clause protects an individual’s
 
liberty interest which is viewed as including an individual’s
 freedom to work and earn a living[.]”) (quotation marks, ellipses
 and citation omitted). 
Accordingly, courts have held that the right to pursue
 
one’s chosen profession free from unreasonable government
 interference comes within the liberty concept of due process. 
-49­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
See Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 492 (1959) (“the right to
 
hold specific private employment and to follow a chosen
 profession free from unreasonable governmental interference comes
 within the liberty and property concepts of the Fifth Amendment”)
 (quotation marks and citations omitted); Truax, 239 U.S. at 38
 (at will employee “has manifest interest in the freedom of the
 employer to exercise his judgment without illegal interference or
 compulsion and, by the weight of authority, the unjustified
 interference of third persons is actionable although the
 employment is at will”); Mead v. Independence Ass’n, 684 F.3d
 226, 232 (1st Cir. 2012) (“The right to hold private employment
 and to pursue one’s chosen profession free from unreasonable
 government interference is encapsulated in the liberty concept of
 the Due Process Clause.”); Stidham v. Texas Comm’n on Private
 Sec., 418 F.3d 486, 491 (5th Cir. 2005) (“We have confirmed the
 principle that one has a constitutionally protected liberty
 interest in pursuing a chosen occupation.”). 
On one hand, merely losing one position in a profession
 
without being “foreclosed from reentering the field” is generally
 not sufficient to demonstrate an infringement of a liberty
 interest. Kartseva v. Dep’t of State, 37 F.3d 1524, 1529 (D.C.
 
Cir. 1994). For example, in Board of Regents of State Colleges
 
v. Roth, the Court held that it would “stretch[] the concept too
 
far to suggest that a person is deprived of ‘liberty’ when he
 
-50­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
simply is not rehired in one job but remains as free as before to
 
seek another.” 408 U.S. 564, 575 (1972). In Roth, a professor
 was hired by a public university for a fixed term of one academic
 year. Id. at 566-67. After the term had expired, the university
 
informed the professor that he would not be rehired; the
 university gave no reason for the decision and no opportunity to
 challenge the decision. Id. at 568. The professor had no tenure
 
rights to continued employment, and state law “clearly [left] the
 decision whether to rehire a nontenured teacher for another year
 to the unfettered discretion of university officials.” Id. at
 
566-67. Based on these facts, the Court held that the
 professor’s liberty interest was not implicated and he was not
 entitled to procedural due process. Id. at 575. 
Similarly in Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union v.
 
McElroy, 367 U.S. 886 (1961), the Court found no liberty interest
 in continued employment, where the plaintiff lost her employment
 at one location but otherwise remained free to pursue her
 profession at other locations. In that case, the plaintiff was a
 short-order cook at a cafeteria operated by a private employer on
 a military installation engaged in developing highly classified
 weapons systems. Id. at 887. The commanding officer of the
 
installation revoked the plaintiff’s identification badge upon
 determining that she had failed to meet the security requirements
 for that specific installation. Id. at 888. Consequently, the
 
-51­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
plaintiff was not permitted to enter the military installation. 
Id. On these facts, the Court found that the plaintiff’s right
 
to follow a chosen trade or profession was not affected, as she
 “remained entirely free to obtain employment as a short-order
 cook or to get any other job, either with [her employer] or with
 any other employer. All that was denied her was the opportunity
 to work at one isolated and specific military installation.” Id.
 
at 895-96. 
However, “the plaintiff may demonstrate that the
 
government’s action precludes him-whether formally or informally
 from such a broad range of opportunities that it interferes with
 his [or her] constitutionally protected right to follow a chosen
 trade or profession.” Taylor v. Resolution Trust Corp., 56 F.3d
 
1497, 1506 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (emphases added) (quotation marks,
 citation and brackets omitted). “In other words, government
 action precluding a litigant from future employment opportunities
 will infringe upon his constitutionally protected liberty
 interests . . . when that preclusion is . . . sufficiently
 broad.” Id. 
In Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, the government
 
revoked a defense contractor’s security clearance based on
 confidential reports that were not made available to the
 
contractor. Id. at 477-80.  The contractor was not given an
 
“opportunity to confront and question persons whose statements
 
-52­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reflected adversely on him or to confront the government
 
investigators who took their statements.” Id. at 479. Without
 
his security clearance, the contractor was unable to obtain
 comparable employment in the aeronautics field. Id. at 486-87. 
Although the Court ultimately decided the case on statutory
 grounds,
13 the Court stated that the contractor’s “work
 
opportunities have been severely limited on the basis of a fact
 determination rendered after a hearing which failed to comport
 with our traditional ideas of fair procedure,” id. at 508, and
 indicated that the case involved “substantial restraints on
 employment opportunities[.]” Id. at 506-07. 
The District of Columbia Circuit has interpreted Greene
 
to require a plaintiff to show that the government’s action has
 “seriously affected, if not destroyed, his [or her] ability to
 
13 The Court held that “in the absence of explicit authorization from
 
either the President or the Congress the respondents were not empowered to
deprive petitioner of his job in a proceeding in which he was not afforded the
safeguards of confrontation and cross-examination.”  Id. at 508.  In light of
its conclusion, the Court held that it need not determine whether the
contractor had been “restrained in the enjoyment of constitutionally protected
rights” and if so, whether the contractor “was accorded due process of law.” 
Id. at 492-93. 
Nevertheless, Greene  has been cited as recognizing a due process
right to pursue a chosen profession free from unreasonable government
interference.  See Chernin v. Lyng, 874 F.2d 501, 505 (8th Cir. 1989)
(“Although . . . Greene was decided on statutory grounds, it is clear from the
Court’s opinion that its decision to read a hearing requirement into the
relevant statutes resulted from the ‘serious constitutional problems’ which
arose from the agency’s failure to provide for the due-process rights of those
affected.”); Phillips v. Vandygriff , 711 F.2d 1217, 1223 (5th Cir. 1983)
(citing Greene for proposition that denying a person collateral credentials or
privileges necessary for pursuing an occupation is actionable under due
process). 
-53­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
obtain employment in [his or her] field.” Taylor, 56 F.3d at
 
1506 (quoting Greene, 360 U.S. at 492) (quotation marks and
 
brackets omitted). The court compared Greene with Cafeteria &
 Restaurant Workers, and held that the “misconduct must
 substantially reduce the value of [the plaintiff’s] human
 capital, as it would if his skills were highly specialized and
 rendered largely unmarketable as a result of the agency’s acts.” 
Id. at 1507. 
In terms of informal government preclusion, courts have
 
also held that foreclosing a person from an occupation by denying
 that person “collateral credentials or privileges practically
 necessary for pursuing an occupation is . . . actionable” as a
 deprivation of a liberty interest. Phillips v. Vandygriff, 711
 
F.2d 1217, 1223 (5th Cir. 1983) (citing Greene, 360 U.S. 474)
 (emphasis added), reh’g granted in part
, 724 F.2d 490 (5th Cir.
 
1984).14 See Silver v. Castle Mem’l Hosp., 53 Haw. 475, 483-84,
 
497 P.2d 564, 571 (1972) (doctor applying for staff privileges at
 a publicly funded hospital “has an interest in being able to
 pursue his profession[,] which requires that the necessary
 
14
 The Fifth Circuit granted rehearing in part in Phillips ,
clarifying the scope of its original holding “that, at a minimum, due process
guarantees to an applicant facing a licensing process notice and an
opportunity to be heard.”  724 F.2d at 492-93.  The court “declined to
 determine the precise scope of the due process rights possessed by an
applicant confronting a de facto licensing process” and “[left] it to the
district court . . . to decide” whether the “form of accessibility” provided
in that case “could fulfill the requirements of due process.”  Id. at 493. 
-54­ 
 
 
  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
facilities be available to him,” and is entitled to procedural
 
due process); Martin, 130 F.3d at 1149 (“Appellant might be
 
foreclosed from practicing as a nephrologist in Harrison County .
 
. . if such foreclosure is the natural consequence of denying
 Appellant collateral credentials necessary for pursuing his
 occupation[.]”) (quotation marks, brackets, ellipses and
 citations omitted). 
In this case, Petitioners’ right to pursue their chosen 
professions as stagehands was directly and unambiguously interfered with by the City’s ban. Unlike in Roth and Cafeteria 
Workers, Petitioners did not merely lose one position as a result 
of the City’s ban. Rather, Minton and Stanley had a history of 
being employed as stagehands specializing in large-scale stage 
productions, and were categorically prohibited from working for any employer at the City’s facilities, where the vast majority of large-scale productions in the city are held. As a result of the City’s ban, private employers, such as Orias, The Lion King 
production, the HSTA, HPU, and Hawai' i Catholic Schools, were 
prevented from freely hiring Minton and Stanley as stagehands for 
their events. 
Because of the close connection between Petitioners’
 
professions and the City’s facilities, prohibiting Petitioners
 from accessing those venues effectively foreclosed their ability
 
-55­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to take advantage of employment opportunities. The natural
 
consequence of the City’s ban was that Minton and Stanley were
 denied privileges that were “practically necessary” to pursuing
 their chosen occupations. See Phillips, 711 F.2d at 1223;
 
Silver, 53 Haw. at 484, 497 P.2d at 571. The City’s ban
 
“seriously affected, if not destroyed,” Petitioners’ abilities to
 
obtain employment in their field, and “substantially reduce[d]
 the value” of their human capital. Taylor, 56 F.3d at 1506-07. 
The ICA failed to consider the City’s interference in
 
the employer-employee relations of Minton and Stanley. Rather,
 the ICA focused largely on the lack of a contract underlying
 Minton’s and Stanley’s work at the City’s facilities, in
 determining that they had no constitutionally protected liberty
 interest in continuing to work at the City’s facilities. Minton,
 
2012 WL 5970950, at *3. However, the lack of a contract is not
 dispositive. At-will employees are protected from “outside
 interference in their employment, and this right provides a
 constitutional cause of action when a government agent unlawfully
 interferes with the employment relation.” Chernin v. Lyng, 874
 
F.2d 501, 505 (8th Cir. 1989). 
The adverse effect of the City’s ban on Minton’s and
 
Stanley’s future employment opportunities was so prevalent and
 comprehensive that it implicated a liberty interest under article
 
-56­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution.15 Accordingly, the 
circuit court clearly erred by finding that Petitioners remained
 
“completely free to perform their respective trades,” 
and that Petitioners “have no constitutionally-protected right .
 
. . to ply their chosen profession as stage/theater workers at
 City-owned venues.” The ICA erred in affirming the circuit court
 by determining that Petitioners failed to assert a cognizable
 liberty interest. Minton, 2012 WL 5970950, at *4. 
B.
 
“Once it is determined that due process applies, the
 
question remains what process is due.” Morrissey v. Brewer, 408
 
U.S. 471, 481 (1972). “‘Due process is flexible and calls for
 such procedural protections as the particular situation
 demands.’” Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 22, 856 P.2d 1207, 1218
 
(1993) (quoting Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 334 (1976))
 (brackets omitted). 
The appropriate process due in a situation requires
consideration of three distinct factors: (1) the private
interest that will be affected by the official action; (2)
the risk of erroneous deprivation of such interest through
the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of
additional procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s
interest, including the function involved and the fiscal or
administrative burdens that the additional procedures would
entail.
 
15
 Given our conclusion that Petitioners demonstrated a cognizable 
liberty interest, we do not reach the question of whether the City’s ban also
implicated a property interest under the Hawai 'i Constitution. 
-57­  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In re Herrick, 82 Hawai' i 329, 343, 922 P.2d 942, 956 (1996) 
(citing Kernan, 75 Haw. at 22-23, 856 P.2d at 1218-19). 
“At its core, procedural due process of law requires 
notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in 
a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation of a significant liberty interest.” State v. Bani, 97 Hawai' i 285, 
293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001). Thus, this court has held that an “elementary and fundamental requirement of due process” is “notice reasonably calculated, under all circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and 
afford them an opportunity to present their objections.” In re 
Herrick, 82 Hawai' i at 343, 922 P.2d at 956 (quoting Klinger v. 
Kepano, 64 Haw. 4, 10, 635 P.2d 938, 942 (1981)). See Brown v. 
Thompson, 91 Hawai' i 1, 10, 979 P.2d 586, 595 (1999) (notice 
“must inform affected parties of the action about to be taken 
against them as well as of procedures available for challenging
 that action.”) (quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Comparatively, in the context of doctors being denied staff
 privileges at hospitals, this court held that procedural due
 process requires an informal hearing before the deciding board,
 timely notice, and a written statement specifying the basis upon
 which privileges were being denied. Silver, 53 Haw. at 484-85,
 
-58­ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
497 P.2d at 571. Thus, the City was required, at a minimum, to
 
provide notice and opportunity to be heard to Petitioners.
 
The City’s ban was imposed through Quintal’s August 31,
 
2007 letter to Ahuna. According to Quintal’s letter, the reason
 
for the ban was that Minton and Stanley “showed a complete
 disregard” in the areas of “customer service and
 professionalism.” 
However, prior to Quintal’s letter, Petitioners were
 
not given any notice that the City was considering sanctioning
 them in relation to the AMM event, much less that the City was
 considering a ban. Based on their experience at the concert and
 based on Orias’ emails after the show, Petitioners were aware of
 the technical sound problems at the concert but had no knowledge
 that they, rather than the City’s sound system, would be held
 responsible for those problems. Petitioners had no knowledge
 that there were additional allegations regarding their demeanor,
 response to requests by Nephi, and their attire at the concert.
 
There is no dispute that City officials did not speak
 
to Petitioners as part of their “investigation.” Adequate notice
 of the complaints against Petitioners was also not provided
 through the union’s involvement in the matter. Ahuna’s emails to
 Orias contained comments by Minton and Stanley, but were clearly
 limited to responding to the technical sound problems raised by
 Orias. Orias’s emails never referenced the stage crew’s demeanor
 
-59­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
or customer service. Thus, the fact that Minton and Stanley were
 
aware of Orias’s concerns as to the sound system quality did not
 provide them with any notice regarding the complaints of
 “customer service and professionalism,” which formed the “real
 basis” of the City’s ban. 
Although Quintal and Fuhrmann met with the union
 
business agent and president the day before the ban was
 instituted, the purpose of the meeting was only to inform them of
 Quintal’s decision. The meeting was short and there was no “real
 discussion” on the matter. The union personnel were not present
 in a capacity to advocate for Petitioners. Moreover, based on
 Ahuna’s letter in response to Quintal’s letter banning
 Petitioners, it is clear that Ahuna was still under the
 impression that the “quality of the sound system and the movement
 and coordination of the sidemen for the Mayor’s portion of the
 program appears to be the princip[al] complaint against my
 members.” His letter consequently did not address undisclosed
 allegations that Minton and Stanley were rude or unprofessional. 
Thus, the union’s involvement in the process did not provide any
 meaningful notice to Minton and Furhmann of the pendency of the
 City’s ban or the basis for the ban. 
As a result of the lack of notice, Minton and Stanley
 
were not given an opportunity to rebut the allegations made
 against them. Cf. Greene, 360 U.S. at 496 (“[W]here governmental
 
-60­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
action seriously injures an individual, and the reasonableness of
 
the action depends on fact findings, the evidence used to prove
 the Government’s case must be disclosed to the individual so that
 he has an opportunity to show that it is untrue.”). 
Providing notice and an opportunity to be heard was
 
especially important in this case, where the key decisions were
 made by two individuals, Fuhrmann and Quintal, who were not
 present at the AMM concert and who relied upon allegations of
 
third persons, including the Mayor. See Herrick, 82 Hawai' i at 
343, 922 P.2d at 956 (appropriate process due in a situation 
requires consideration of “the risk of erroneous deprivation of [private] interest through the procedures used”). Petitioners, however, were not told of the nature of their “unprofessional” conduct and who had made these allegations, and they were not given an opportunity to provide explanations concerning such matters as their interactions with Nephi, their attire, and their decisions at the concert. 
Additionally, Petitioners were not given a hearing or
 
its equivalent, and were not permitted even an informal meeting
 with City officials to discuss the allegations against them. 
After Quintal’s letter, Ahuna requested that Quintal temporarily
 suspend his decision for two weeks and hold an immediate meeting
 to discuss the matter in greater detail, given the “differing
 
-61­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
perceptions on what went wrong” at the show. However, such a
 
meeting was never held. 
Viewing the record as a whole, it is apparent that
 
Respondents had no interest in providing Petitioners an
 opportunity to be heard, although there appeared to be
 appropriate explanations for all of the allegations of
 unprofessionalism that purportedly formed the basis of the ban. 
Quintal specifically testified that he did not “feel it was
 necessary to know” why Minton sent Lyons onto the stage during
 the concert. 
Under these circumstances, it is clear that Petitioners
 
were denied the most “elementary and fundamental requirement of
 due process”: notice of the charges against them and an
 opportunity to voice their objections in a meaningful time and
 manner before governmental deprivation of a significant liberty
 interest. The lack of due process in this case is particularly
 egregious when considering that Petitioners’ livelihoods were at
 stake. See id. (due process requires consideration of “private
 
interest that will be affected by the official action”). 
Accordingly, the circuit court clearly erred by finding
 
that Petitioners were “generally provided with notice” through
 the union, and that the “overall process provided by Quintal,
 Fuhrmann and the City consisted of meaningful notice of the
 complaints against Minton and Stanley” and “contained an
 
-62­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
opportunity for Minton and Stanley . . . to respond to the
 
complaints against them[.]” (Emphases added). 
The circuit court also erred in concluding “in the
 
second alternative” that Minton and Stanley received “adequate
 notice for purposes of due process” and “a meaningful process to
 challenge the complaints against them.” The record in this case
 makes it apparent that the City conducted its investigation
 without once contacting Petitioners and that regardless of the
 union’s involvement, Petitioners were uninformed of the pendency
 of the City’s ban and the “real basis” for the ban, and were
 denied any meaningful opportunity to rebut the allegations made
 against them. 
Consequently, the ICA erred in affirming the circuit
 
court’s judgment. 
VII.
 
Based on the foregoing, we hold that Petitioners 
established a violation of their protected liberty interests 
under article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution, and 
further established that procedural due process was not afforded
 
prior to the City’s ban. Thus, the City’s ban cannot be
 justified as an exercise of its authority to operate and maintain
 its facilities, and Petitioners are entitled to a mandatory
 injunction rescinding the City’s ban. 
-63­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Additionally, because the City’s ban was not a proper
 
use of the City’s authority to manage its facilities, such
 
authority cannot be raised as a defense to Petitioners’
 underlying tort claims. We thus address Petitioners’ claim that
 Respondents tortiously interfered with their “prospective
 advantage, prospective business relationships and contracts with
 
producers.” 
See Kahale v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu,  104 Hawai' i 
341, 349, 90 P.3d 233, 241 (2004) (“the City is subject to the
 
state’s tort laws in the same manner as any other private
 tortfeasor”). 
The elements of the tort of intentional interference
 
with prospective business advantage are: 
(1) the existence of a valid business relationship or a
prospective advantage or expectancy sufficiently definite,
specific, and capable of acceptance in the sense that there
is a reasonable probability of it maturing into a future
economic benefit to the plaintiff; (2) knowledge of the
relationship, advantage, or expectancy by the defendant; (3)
a purposeful intent to interfere with the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation between the
act of interference and the impairment of the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; and (5) actual damages.
 
Haw. Med. Ass'n v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai' i 77, 
116, 148 P.3d 1179, 1218 (2006) (quoting Robert’s Haw. Sch. Bus,
 
Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 Hawai' i 224, 258, 982 P.2d 
853, 887 (1999)).16
 
16
 This court has previously suggested that the tort of interference
 
with prospective contractual relations is a sub-species of, or otherwise
distinct from, the broader tort of interference with prospective economic
(continued...)
 
-64­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The first element requires “ a colorable economic
 
relationship between the plaintiff and a third party with the
 
potential to develop into a full contractual relationship. The
 prospective economic relationship need not take the form of an
 offer but there must be specific facts proving the possibility of
 
future association.” Haw. Med. Ass’n, 113 Hawai' i at 116, 148 
P.3d at 1218 (quoting Locricchio v. Legal Servs. Corp., 833 F.2d
 
1352, 1357 (9th Cir. 1987)) (quotation marks omitted).  See §
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766B cmt. c (1979) (“The
 
relations protected against intentional interference” include
 
“interferences with the prospect of obtaining employment”).
    
In this case, Petitioners alleged tortious interference
 
with their prospective business advantage with “producers.” 
The
 
16(...continued)
advan
tage. See Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawai 'i 202, 216 n.8, 159 P.3d 814, 828 
n.8 (2007) (“In Kutcher v. Zimmerman, the ICA noted that ‘the tort of
interference with prospective contractual relations is a sub-species of the
broader tort of interference with prospective economic advantage.’”) (quoting
87 Hawai 'i 394, 405 n.15, 957 P.2d 1076, 1087 n.15 (App. 1998)); Whitey’s Boat 
Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai 'i 302, 317 n.25, 
132 P.3d 1213, 1228 n.25 (2006) (“In addition to the elements required to
establish a claim for tortious interference with prospective businessadvantage, a plaintiff asserting a claim for tortious interference withprospective contractual relations must also prove that ‘the defendant acted
without proper justification.’”) (citing Kutcher, 87 Hawai 'i at 406, 957 P.2d 
at 1088).  Inasmuch as Petitioners satisfy the elements of the tort of“interference with prospective business advantage” as set forth in Hawai 'i 
Medical Ass’n, we need not address whether “interference with prospective
contractual relations” is a sub-species of, or otherwise distinct from the
tort of “interference with prospective business advantage,” whether their
respective elements differ, or whether Petitioners satisfy the elements of the
former. 
-65­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence adduced at trial established that Petitioners had 
colorable economic relationships with third parties, including 
the producers of The Lion King show, Hawai' i Catholic Schools, 
the HSTA, and HPU. 
Second, the City had “‘actual knowledge’ of the 
expectancy or ‘knowledge of facts which would lead a reasonable 
person to believe that such interest exists,’” Haw. Med. Ass’n, 
113 Hawai' i at 116, 148 P.3d at 1218 (citation omitted), as 
evidenced by the written requests to the City for Minton and Stanley to work for the HSTA and Hawai' i Catholic Schools, and 
the testimony regarding Minton’s inability to work at the HPU 
event and Stanley’s inability to work on the Lion King show. 
Third, the City intentionally interfered with such
 
prospective business advantage by banning Petitioners from
 working at the City’s facilities. The intent element “denotes
 purposefully improper interference and requires a state of mind
 or motive more culpable than mere intent.” Id. (quotation marks
 
and citations omitted). “In other words, the plaintiff must
 prove that the defendant either pursued an improper objective of
 harming the plaintiff or used wrongful means that caused injury
 in fact.” Id. (quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In this case, the City’s ban violated Petitioners’ due
 
process rights and therefore used wrongful means to cause injury
 
-66­Finally, the City’s interference impaired Petitioners’
 
economic relationships with the third party producers and caused
 
actual damages to Petitioners in the form of lost employment and
 wages, as demonstrated by Dr. Loudat’s testimony. Thus,
 Petitioners established legal causation and the existence of
 
actual damages. 
See Haw. Med. Ass’n,  113 Hawai' i at 116, 148 
P.3d at 1218. 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
to Petitioners. Cf. W.P. Keeton et. al, Prosser and Keeton on
 
the Law of Torts § 129, at 982 (5th ed. 1984) (defining intent
 
element of the tort of interference with contract and stating
 that once “knowledge of the plaintiff’s contract or interest” is
 established, “the defendant may be held liable for an
 interference with the plaintiff’s known economic interests if the
 defendant invades those interests by . . . unconstitutional
 acts”) (footnotes omitted). 
The circuit court therefore erred in finding that any
 
claim that Petitioners suffered “significant economic losses” as
 a result of the ban was “speculative since it is based largely
 upon their expectation that they would have worked many, if not
 all, of the events that they either had previously worked or for
 which they would have been otherwise eligible and available to do
 
so.” 
The circuit court also clearly erred in finding that
 
neither Minton nor Stanley “provided adequate proof that they had
 
-67­*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
any prospective contract with any party which was interfered with
 
due to the Defendants’ actions herein.” 
The court thus erred in concluding that Petitioners
 
“failed to present credible evidence to establish that they had .
 . . prospective contractual rights with Catholic Schools of
 Hawaii and/or Hawaii Pacific University” and alternatively
 “failed to present credible evidence that any Defendant
 interfered with any . . . prospective business advantage[.]” 
The evidence was uncontradicted that Furhmann 
specifically communicated with Hawai' i Catholic Schools and 
informed them that Minton and Stanley were not permitted to work 
at the requested event, and further instructed Hawai' i Catholic 
Schools to seek other workers from the union. The evidence was 
also undisputed that the City’s ban directly interfered with Petitioners’ ability to work at other scheduled events, including the Lion King production and the HPU and HSTA events. Additionally, the evidence of the financial effect of the ban upon Minton and Stanley was adduced by an expert agreed upon by the parties. The City offered no substantive evidence showing that the ban did not interfere with Petitioners’ prospective business advantage; rather, the City’s primary argument was that the City’s ban was a proper use of its authority to manage and maintain the City’s facilities. However, we have rejected this 
-68­Accordingly, we conclude that Petitioners established
 
the elements of their claim of tortious interference with
 
prospective business advantage, including the existence of
 damages. We therefore remand to the circuit court for a
 determination of the amount of damages to be awarded against the
 
City.
17   See Estate of Klink v. State, 113 Hawai' i 332, 337, 152 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
contention and concluded that the City’s ban was not proper
 
because it was imposed without affording due process to
 Petitioners and therefore imposed in a manner that derogated
 
their individual rights under the Hawai' i Constitution. 
17 The course of the proceedings in this case indicated that
 
Petitioners were suing Quintal and Furhmann in their official capacity.  See
 
Kentucky v. Graham, 473 U.S. 159, 167 n.14 (1985) (noting in the context of
claims brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, “In many cases, the complaint will not
clearly specify whether officials are sued personally, in their official
capacity, or both.  The course of proceedings in such cases typically will
indicate the nature of liability sought to be imposed.”) (quotation marks and
citation omitted).  
“Official-capacity suits . . . generally represent only another
way of pleading an action against an entity of which an officer is an agent.” 
Id. at 165 (citing Monell v. New York City Dep’t of Social Servs.
, 436 U.S.
658, 690 n.55 (1978)).  Petitioners alleged in their Complaint that Quintal
and Fuhrmann “acted as agents of [the City] within their perception of the
scope of their positions, on account of which [the City] is liable for the
individual defendants’ wrongful, tortious and illegal conduct[.]”
   
During closing arguments at trial, the circuit court indicated
that it was its understanding that all of the claims against Quintal and
Fuhrmann were being made in their official capacity.  Respondents’ counsel
stated that he had based his case and arguments “[t]o a large degree” on the
understanding that the claims were official-capacity claims, and argued, “[I]f
they’re just suing them in their individual capacity, it would change.” 
Petitioners’ counsel did not indicate whether the claims were official-
capacity or personal-capacity claims in his rebuttal. 
  
In the parties’ briefs to the ICA, the parties raised arguments
regarding whether Quintal and Furhmann were entitled to qualified immunity.
  
In Respondents’ answering brief to the ICA, however, Respondents noted that
the circuit court had not made a ruling granting the City immunity.  In
 Petitioners’ reply brief, Petitioners responded that there is “no disagreement
at this time that the City is not immune” and stated that “[t]he immunity
issue has, from a practical point of view, become inconsequential and should
(cont
inued...)
 
-69­therefore be disregarded.”  (...continued)
Finally, at oral argument, Petitioners’ counsel indicated that he
was uninterested in pursing claims against Quintal and Fuhrmann if successful
on claims against the City.  MP3: Oral Argument, Hawai 'i Supreme Court, at 
1:01:07 (Jun. 19, 2013), available at
http://state.hi.us/jud/oa/13/SCOA_061913_11317.mp3.
Accordingly, we treat Petitioners’ suit as an official-capacity
suit and we do not address the question of qualified immunity. 
*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
P.3d 504, 509 (2007) (vacating judgment and holding based on the
 
record that State was negligent and liable to the plaintiffs as a
 matter of law and remanding on the issue of damages); Brown v.
 
Thompson, 91 Hawai' i 1, 979 P.2d 586 (1999) (vacating and 
deciding several claims as a matter of law and assessing
 
damages). 
VIII.
 
Based on the foregoing, the judgments entered by the
 
circuit court and the ICA are vacated and the case is remanded to
 the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Charles S. Lotsof and 
Jack F. Schweigert
for petitioners 
/s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 
Curtis E. Sherwood 
for respondents
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
/s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti
 
/s/ Glenn J. Kim
 
17
-70­