*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
DONNA LEE CHING, 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross -Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
NANCY LOO DUNG, Individually, and as Trustee under that certain 
unrecorded Nancy Loo Dung Revocable Living Trust dated 
September 8, 1993; The Estate of DENNIS QUAN KEONG DUNG, 
DECEASED AS Trustee under that certain unrecorded Irrevocable 
Trust for Dixon Quan Hon Dung, dated June 21, 1995, and as 
Trustee under that certain unrecorded Nancy Loo Dung Revocable 
Living Trust dated September 8, 1993; PATSY BOW YUK DUNG, 
Individually, and as Trustee under that certain unrecorded 
Revocable Trust Agreement dated August 19, 2003;  
DIXON QUAN HON DUNG; BILLIE DUNG; ANNETTE KWAI FAH DUNG; 
DENBY DUNG; DARAH DUNG; DEAN DUNG, 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants.  
(CIVIL NO. 07-1 -1116-06) 
 
 
DONNA L. CHING, Individually,
 
Petitioner/Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant -Appellant/Cross Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
ANNETTE KWAI FAH DUNG, Personal Representative of the Estate of 
Dennis Quan Keong Dung; PATSY BOW YUK DUNG, Trustee of the 
Revocable Trust of Patsy Bow Yuk Dung, Individually; BILLIE DUNG, 
Individually; DARAH DUNG, Individually; DEAN DUNG, Individually; 
DENBY DUNG , Individually, 
Respondents/Defendants/Counterclaim  
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross- Appellants. 
(CIVIL NO. 13- 1-2929-11) 
 Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000845
21-DEC-2020
08:28 AM
Dkt. 40 OP*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
2  
SCWC-16-0000845 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000845) 
 
DECEMBER 21 , 2020 
 
NAKAYAMA, ACTING C.J., WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.,  AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE TONAKI, IN PLACE OF MCKENNA, J., RECUSED, 
WITH CIRCUIT JUDGE CRABTREE, IN PLACE OF RECKTENWALD, C.J., 
RECUSED, CONCURRING  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J. 
  
I. INTRODUCTION 
This case arise s from a dispute that began in 2007 
between neighbors, Donna Lee Ching (“Ching”)  and the Dung family1 
(“Dungs”), 
over an easement located on the Dungs’ property that 
provides Ching access to her landlocked property.  The easement 
dispute escalated into numerous incidents of alleged wrongful 
conduct by both Ching and the Dungs, culminating in a $616,000 
jury verdict in favor of Ching in 2016.   
Both parties appealed to the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (“ICA”) .  The ICA  vacated the First Circuit Court’s 
September 15, 2016 Judgment;  November 14, 2016 Order Denying 
Additur; April 12, 2016 Order Granting in Part, and Denying in 
Part Judgment as a Matter of Law (“JMOL”) ; January 4, 2017 Order 
                     
1  For the purposes of this case, the Dung family consists of 
Annette Dung (“Annette”) , Dixon Dung (“Dixon”) , Darah Dung (“Darah”) , Dean 
Dung (“Dean”), and Denby  Dung (“Denby”) . 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
3 Denying Further JMOL;  and January 4, 2017 Order Denying New 
Trial, holding that the circuit court made numerous errors.  The 
ICA also 
vacated the jury’s verdicts as to Ching’s claims for 
nuisance, civil conspiracy, and malicious prosecution because it 
found that it was impossible to determine whether the jury’s 
unspecified lump- sum damages award was based on one of the 
improper grounds that it had vacated.  To reach this conclusion, 
the ICA applied the “general verdict rule”2 to vacate the entire 
jury award and remanded  the case for a new trial.   
On certiorari, Ching raises four points of error and 
alleges that the ICA erred by (1) sua sponte raising and 
subsequently misapplying the “general verdict rule,” (2) sua 
sponte raising and then misapplying the law of civil conspiracy, 
(3) improperly vacating the circuit court’s order on judicial 
admissions and judicial estoppel, and (4) improperly vacating 
the jury’s verdict on nuisance, invasion of privacy, and 
malicious prosecution claims.  
We hold that the
 ICA erred when it vacated the jury’s 
civil conspiracy verdict, when it vacated the circuit court’s 
order on judicial admissions and judicial estoppel, and when it 
vacated the jury’s verdict on  Ching’s nuisance, invasion of 
                     
2  The ICA defines the general verdict rule as “where several counts 
are tried, a general verdict will be upheld if any one count is supported by 
substantial evidence and is unaffected by error, in the absence of an 
objection to the form of verdict. ” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
4 privacy, and malicious prosecution claims
.  Our review of t he 
ICA’s application of the general verdict rule is  unnecessary  to 
the disposition of this case because all of the grounds upon 
which the jury verdict rested are affirmed.  We consequently 
reverse the ICA’s September 16, 2019 Judgment on Appeal.  
II. BACKGROUND 
A. The Easement 
Ching is the owner of the property located at 1212A 
Wilder Avenue (“Lot 28”).  The Dungs are the owners of the 
adjacent property (“Lot 27”).  Originally owned as a single 
undivided property, Lot 27 and Lot 28 were divided into two 
parcels on September 29, 1944, with an easement running along 
the edge of Lot
 27 so that Lot 28 would have access to Hoonanea 
Street.3 
In the 1970s or 1980s, the Dungs constructed a paved 
driveway from Hoonanea Street over the easement to the border of 
Lot 28 for their own use.  According to the Dungs, the Ching 
family did not use the driveway (or the easement) because the 
properties were separated by a wall, which was later partially 
removed.  Historically, Ching’s property was mainly accessed via 
                     
3  The subdivision was approved in light of “the Petition stating 
that Lot 28 will have access to Hoonanea Street over Easement ‘A’[,]” and the 
approving order (“Order 5938”) also included Map 8, identifying “Easement A” 
as running along the edge of Lot 27.  Map 8 noted that the easement is 12 
feet wide, 1866 square feet, and that “Lot 28 will have access to Hoonanea 
Street over Easement ‘A .’”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
5 pedestrian pathways from Wilder Avenue and did not have any 
vehicular access directly
 to the property. 
B. 2007 Litigation 
The easement conflict began in 2007, when Ching 
started construction of a paved ramp connecting her property to 
the Dungs’ driveway and the easement.   To build the ramp, Ching 
had construction vehicles use the easement for access as it was 
the only vehicular access to her property.  The Dungs protested 
the use of their driveway by construction vehicles and 
eventually erected a chain across the driveway.  
On June 21, 2007, Ching filed a Complaint (“2007 
Complaint”) against th e Dungs alleging they had blocked her 
access to the Easement and interrupted her use and enjoyment of 
the Easement.  On October 5, 200 7, the Dungs filed an Answer to 
Ching’s complaint  and a Counterclaim asserting nine counts.  In 
their Answer, the Dungs acknowledged the existence of an 
easement for ingress, egress, and temporary parking while 
unloading and loading.  Following the Dungs’ Answer, the 2007 
Complaint and the Dungs’ Counter -complaint were “informally 
resolved” by the parties.  Although the Dungs’ counsel sent a 
letter indicating that the Dungs were prepared to stipulate to 
the existence of the easement, the record does not indicate 
whether the stipulation was ever finalized or submitted to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
6 courts. 
 Despite the informal resolution, the case remained 
pending in circuit court. 
C. 2013 Injunction Against Harassment
 
Though the parties informally  resolved the 2007 Suit, 
the conflict over the easement continued.  According to Ching, 
the Dungs would impede her access to the easement by placing 
objects and plants or parking their cars in the access, 
preventing her visitors and workers from using the easement, and 
frequently call
ing the police when she used the easement.  
According to the Dungs, Ching would bother their dogs, trespass 
against their property and chattel by pushing objects and plants 
out of the easement, and drive her car recklessly up and down 
the driveway.  
On June 20, 2013, Annette Dung received a T emporary 
Restraining Order and Injunction Against Harassment (“Injunction 
Against Harassment”) against Ching related to her use of the 
easement.  At the district court ’s February 4, 2014 hearing 
regarding the Injunction Against Harassment,4 the court 
recognized the existence of the easement but granted a permanent 
Injunction Against Harassment for a period of three years 
                     
 4  The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
7 because Ching abused the easement by using it
 “as a way to annoy 
her neighbors[.] ”5  
D. 2013 Litigation
 
On November 1, 2013, Ching filed a complaint against 
the Dungs, which was later amended on May 27, 2015 (“2013 
Complaint”).  The 2013 Complaint asserted twelve claims:  (1) 
Easement by Grant; (2) Easement by Necessity; (3) Easement by 
Estoppel; (4) Declaratory Relief; (5) Injunctive Relief; (6) 
Constructive Trust; (7) Breach of Contract; (8) Invasion of 
Privacy; (9) Defamation/Slander; (10) Civil Conspiracy; (11) 
Malicious Prosecution; and (12) Nuisance.  The 2007 litigation 
and the 2013 Complaint were consolidated by order of the court 
on January 8, 2015. 
On August 29, 2014
, the Dungs filed an Answer to the 
2013 Complaint and a Counterclaim asserting six claims:  (1) 
Abuse of Process; (2) Malicious Prosecution; (3) Trespass; (4) 
Assault and Battery; (5) Intentional Infliction of Emotional 
                     
5   Ching appealed the district court’s grant of the Injunction 
Against Harassment , and the ICA affirmed the grant of injunction on June 25, 
2015.  Dung v. Ching, No. CAAP- 14-0000425, 2015 WL 3936910, at *3 (App. June 
25, 2015) (SDO).  In its SDO, the ICA acknowledged the existence of the 
easement and noted that easement di d “not specify whether it was established 
for pedestrian access, vehicular access, or both, but Mrs. Dung’s family did 
not have vehicular access to the street until the 1970s and Ms. Ching did not 
have vehicular access until 2007.”  Id. at *1 n.3.  Ching petitioned this 
court for a writ of certiorari, which was denied on October 29, 2015.  Dung 
v. Ching, No. SCWC -14-0000425 (S.Ct. Oct. 29, 2015) (cert denied).  
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
8 Distress; and (6) Declaratory and Injunctive Relief
 that Ching 
had no rights to the easement, that the easement was “ null and 
void and of no legal force and effect [,]” and that Ching be 
enjoined from using the Dungs’  driveway.  
As Ching’s 2013 Complaint was pending, the Dungs 
obtained a permit and constructed a gate across the easement, 
closed it, and put up signs warning that trespassers would be 
prosecuted.  The gate required Ching to park her car on Hoonanea 
Street (because the Dungs ’ Injunction Against Harassment 
prevented her from parking on the easement), walk down the 
easement and open the gate, walk back up the easement to her 
car, and drive down the easement onto her property.   
On October 2, 2014, Ching filed a motion for a 
preliminary injunction enjoining the Dungs from obstructing  her 
use of the easement for ingress and egress.  At the November 7, 
2014 hearing, the court noted t hat the Dungs “did not dispute 
the existence of the easement for ingress and egress in the 2007 
litigation, and the evidence indicates that the plaintiff holds 
a 12-foot easement over defendants’ property for access to 
Hoonanea Street.”6  The court found t hat “the gate pose[d] an 
unreasonable interference with [Ching’s] right to use the 
easement for ingress and egress” and that Ching “has shown that 
                     
6  The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
9 (continued . . .)  she is likely to prevail on the merits[.]”7  The court ordered 
the Dungs to (1) remove the signs at the top of the driveway 
warning that the driveway may not be used to service the Ching 
residence, (2) remove a bar at the top of the driveway that 
prevented work trucks from using the driveway, (3) keep the gate 
open at all times, and (4) refrain from “obstructing or 
interfering with [Ching’s] right to use the easement for ingress 
and egress[.]”   
On July 1, 2015, Ching filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment (“MSJ”) as to the existence of the easement.  Relevant 
to this appeal, Ching argued that the court should take n
otice 
of the Dungs’ prior judicial admission to the existence of the 
easement made in the 2007 litigation.8  According to Ching, the 
                     
7  The court also held that:   
 
Under Hawai‘ i law, where the width, length and location of 
an easement for ingress and egress have been expressly set forth 
in the instrument, the easement is specific and definite.  The 
express terms of the grant or reservation are controlling in such 
case and considerations of what may be necessary or reasonable to 
a present use of the dominant estate are not controlling.  If, 
however, the width, length and location of an easement for 
ingress and egress are not fixed by the terms of the grant or 
reservation, the dominant estate is ordinarily entitled to a way 
of such width, length and location as is sufficient to afford 
necessary or reasonable ingress or egress.  That’s the 
Consolidated Amusement Company case, 6 Hawai ‘i App. 312, 317 -18.  
That’s a 1986 case.   
 
8  Ching also identified other places where the Dungs demonstrated 
their belief and acknowledgement that an easement exists for ingress and 
egress, including an October 7, 2006 email from Annette to Ching,  an October 
31, 2006 letter from Annette to Ching,  and a June 21, 2007 letter from the 
Dungs’ attorney, Bert T. Kobayashi, to Ching’s attorney, Wayne Mau . 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
10 Dungs’ acceptance of the  easement ’s existence  is further 
evidenced by the fact that the 2007 litigation was informally 
                     
(continued . . .)  
 
In the October 7, 2006 email to Ching, Annette wrote:  
 
1.  I understand that the new curb cut and necessary 
connections from the street to the existing easement are 
your responsibility.  
 
2.  I will remove the low rock wall on the Dung property at 
the top of the driveway.  Please note that access to the 
easement from the street is blocked by a No Parking sign 
and a utility pole.   
 
In the letter to Ching dated October 31, 2006, Annette  wrote: 
 
1.  The measurement of the 12 foot easement shall be from 
the property line as staked by our professional licensed 
surveyor.  The official land use documents do not specify 
that the measure of the 12 foot easement shall be taken 
from the “ inside” of our rock wall.  
 
. . . . 
 
6.
  As previously discussed, the easement is for 
ingress/egress purposes only.  
 
7.  . . . The time of the easement agreement dates back to 
the early 1940’s [ sic].  According to our findings, the 
only specified language defining the easement is, “a grant 
of a right to use a strip of land for a specific purpose.”   
 
In Mr. Kobayashi ’s letter, he  wrote in pertinent part:   
 
With regard to the injunctive relief requested, Mrs. 
Dung agrees for the land owners that what is being 
requested is consistent with what her understanding is at 
this time and that there is no need to request injunctive 
relief through the Courts.  The only point that my [sic] be 
in question is the ability to park on the easement as the 
easement is one that can be used by both the land owners 
and the Chings.  I have advised Mrs. Dung and she agrees 
that parking is within the use of an ingress and egress 
easement if it is for the purposes of loading and unloading 
. . . . Therefore, I am authorized to advise you that my 
clients, who are named as defendants:  . . . agree that I 
have the authority upon presentation (if you believe such 
stipulation to be necessary) to execute a stipulation to 
the effect that they will not block, interfere with or 
obstruct the easement in question.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
11 resolved after the Dungs admitted to the existence of the 
easement for ingress and egress in the 2006 and 2007 
correspondence and in their answer to the 2007 C omplaint .  Ching 
argued that following this informal resolution, the Dungs did 
not object to the construction of the ramp connecting her 
property to the easement over the Dungs ’ driveway,  and she 
thereafter made frequent use of the easement for ingress and 
egress.   
In response,  the Dungs argued  that Ching cannot 
establish that an easement exists based on judicial admissions 
or under a theory of judicial estoppel because,  (1) “the Dungs 
are not competent to testify as to legal conclusions such as the 
creation or termination of easements, ” (2) their 2007 litigation 
statements were a legal position rather than a factual 
admission, (3) the 2007 position was not inconsistent with the 
Dungs’ current position, (4) the 2007 proceeding is not part of 
the “same proceedin g[,]” (5) “the legal landscape . . . changed 
from the law in 2007” because there was  new precedent in Hawai ‘i 
providing for the termination of easements by prescription
, and 
(6) had the Dungs been able to retain their requested expert, 
“they would have known, as they do now, that Easement ‘A’ was, 
if anything, a ‘paper’ easement.”    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
12 On August 13, 2015, a hearing was held on Ching’s MSJ.9  
The court noted that in the 2007 case , the Dungs ’ legal counsel 
“was prepared to stipulate to the existence of that easement” 
and that “it is clear to this Court that an easement was 
recognized by the parties and does exist.”  The court granted 
Ching’s MSJ in part and denied it in part, by recognizing the 
easement as valid but leaving to the jury the determination of 
whether the easement is for vehicular use, pedestrian use, or 
both, among other issues.  
Following opposing requests by the parties
, the court 
held a Hearing Regarding Legal and Equitable Issues to determine 
whether the scope of the Easement is a question of law for the 
court to determine or a question of fact for the jury to 
determine on January 25, 2016 .  The court then ruled and issued 
an order that the Dungs were judicially estopped from:  (1) 
denying the existence of an access easement; (2) denying that 
the easement is for ingress and egress; and (3) denying that the 
easement is for vehicular travel and the reasonable loading and 
unloading of material from plaintiff’s property.  The court 
determined that certain other terms and conditions of the 
easement were open questions of fact for the jury to decide, 
                     
9  The Honorable Gary Won Bae Chang presided.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
13 including:  (1) whether the easement includes 
pedestrian access; 
and (2) whether the easement allows stopping or parking.   
Prior to trial, the court ruled on the parties ’ 
Motions in Limine (“MIL”) .10  Ching filed ten MIL.  Ching’s MIL 
No. 2 sought to preclude the Dungs from denying the existence of 
the easement.  T he circuit court granted  Ching’s MIL  No. 2 but 
allowed the Dungs to assert the defense of abandonment.    
The circuit court granted Ching’s MIL No. 3 , which 
sought to preclude the Dungs from claiming the easement is not 
for pedestrian ingress and egress.  
Ching’s MIL No. 7 sought to strike the testimony of 
Professor Robert Bruce Graham, Jr. 
(“Professor Graham”)  because 
Professor Graham’s testimony that the easement was “a paper 
easement” that would not have been intended to include vehicular 
access was irrelevant.  The court denied the MIL in part, 
allowing Professor Graham to “educate the jury about what 
consolidation and re- subdivision involves[,]” and grante d the 
MIL in part to preclude “all other opinion testimony of 
[Professor] Graham.”   
The circuit court granted the Dungs ’ only MIL, which 
sought an order from the court stating that Ching’s “misuse of 
the subject easement has already been adjudicated and therefore 
                     
10  Only MIL relevant to this appeal are discussed in this Opinion.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
14 Hawai
‘i law princ
iples of collateral estoppel (or issue 
preclusion) apply.”  The Dungs argued that the district court , 
in granting the Dungs’ Injunction Against Harassment , determined 
that Ching used the easement to harass the Dungs during the 2014 
Injunction Against Harassment and that harassment is “identical 
to the ‘misuse’ element of the Dungs’ equitable claim that 
Ching’s easement should be terminated or restricted.”  The 
circuit court granted the Dungs’ MIL, but limited  the evidence 
of Ching’s “easement abuse” to the findings made by the district 
court when it granted the Dungs’ Injunction Against Harassment  
and precluded any reference to the phrase “easement abuse” and 
limited “the evidence to the determinations of Judge Kawashima 
through the date of the injunction that was issued.”   
A jury trial
 before the circuit court began on 
February 16, 2016 and concluded on March 4, 2016.   In accordance 
with the Special Verdict form, the jury found that:  (1) the 
subject easement was for both pedestrian and vehicular use; (2) 
the Dungs, including Annette Dung, Dixon Dung, Dean Dung, Denby 
Dung, and Darah Dung,  engaged in a civil conspiracy against 
Ching; (3) the Dungs, including Annette Dung, Dixon Dung, Dean 
Dung, Denby Dung, and Darah Dung,  committed nuisance against 
Ching; (4) the Dungs, including Annette Dung, Denby Dung, and 
Darah Dung, invaded Ching’s pri vacy; (5) the Dungs, including *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
15 Annette Dung, Denby Dung, and Darah Dung,  defamed Ching; and (6) 
Denby Dung “and/or” Darah Dung engaged in an act of malicious 
prosecution against Ching.  The jury found that Ching’s damages 
consisted of Special Damages of $16,600.00, General Damages of 
$500,000.00, and Punitive Damages of $100,000.00 for a total 
award of $616,000.00.  The jury also found that:  (1) Ching had 
not abandoned the easement; (2) Ching had not misused her 
easement rights; (3) Ching had not intentionally inflicted 
emotional distress upon any of the Dungs; and (4) that the Dungs 
were not entitled to damages.   
After trial, on March 9, 2019, t he court denied both 
parties’ requests for equitable relief because both sides had 
“unclean hands[.]”  The circu it court entered Final Judgment on 
September 15, 2016.   
E. Proceedings 
Before the ICA 
Both Ching and the Dungs appealed.   The ICA entered 
the Opinion of the Court on August 15, 2019 and entered its 
Judgment on Appeal on September 16, 2019.  In its Opinion, the 
ICA held that the case must be remanded for a new trial because 
the circuit court made numerous errors, discussed below. 
1. Judicial Admissions and Estoppel 
 
The ICA concluded that the Dungs’ statement that they 
have “always fully accepted the idea of an e asement for ingress *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
16 and egress” was “not a statement of concrete fact” and that it 
was also “not an admission concerning the intent of the original 
parties to the Easement’s creation[.]”  The ICA then held that 
the Dungs’ answers to the 2007 Complaint were not “sufficiently 
clear, deliberate, and unequivocal that they should be decisive 
to the outcome of an issue that is so central to the dispute 
between the parties[.]”   
The ICA reviewed the record and concluded that the 
easement was “ambiguous” because there was “no additional 
information regarding the scope or intended use of the 
Easement.”  Consequently, the ICA found that the scope of the 
easement was a question of fact for the jury to decide,  and the 
circuit court was wrong to conclude that the Dungs had 
judicially admitted that the scope includes vehicular access.   
Thus, the ICA concluded that the 
circuit court erred 
in ruling that the Dungs made a judicial admission,  when it 
estopped the Dungs from denying the  scope and use of the 
easement.  The ICA also concluded that the circuit court erred 
when it estopped the Dungs from presenting evidence concerning 
the scope of the e asement.   
2. Limitation of Expert Testimony  
 
The ICA suggested that the circuit  court limited 
Professor Graham’s testimon y at trial because it  had concluded  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
17 that the Dungs “judicially admitted critical facts regarding the 
Easement’s scope [.]”  The ICA did not decide whether Professor 
Graham’s testimony should have been admitted at trial, 
instructing the circuit court “to reconsider whether the Dungs’ 
expert’s proposed testimony meets the standards for expert 
testimony and would provide relevant evidence regarding, inter 
alia, the scope of the Easement.”  
3. Injunction Against Harassment 
 
The ICA concluded that the Injunction Against 
Harassment was relevant at trial and “was critical to explain 
(and perhaps justify) why the Dungs called the [Honolulu Police 
Department (“HPD”)]  to report various actions of Ching that they 
believed violated the Injunction.”  The ICA noted that “[t]h ere 
were numerous instances at trial in which the Injunction was 
mentioned or referred to by witnesses” and concluded that the 
Injunction was “highly relevant to the issue of whether the 
Dungs’ calls to the HPD were a nuisance.”  Accordingly, the  ICA 
held that the circuit court abused its discretion when it  
refused to admit into evidence the Injunction Against 
Harassment.  The ICA appeared to base this determination, at 
least in part, on the fact that the circuit  court admitted the 
Preliminary Injunction in favor of Ching while excluding the 
Injunction Against Harassment in favor of the Dungs.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
18 4. JMOLs on Invasion of Privacy, Defamation, Malicious 
Prosecution, Nuisance, and Damages 
 
The ICA reviewed each of the Dungs’ JMOLs as to 
Ching’s claims, including Nu isance, Invasion of Privacy, 
Defamation, and Malicious Prosecution.  
In its review of the circuit  court’s disposition of 
the Dungs’ motions for JMOL as to Ching’s nuisance claim, the 
ICA “conclude[d that] there was sufficient evidence to submit 
Ching’s nuisance claim to the jury. ”  The ICA, however, vacated 
the nuisance claim because it held that the circuit court’s 
ruling on the Dungs’ judicial admissions/estoppel had been 
error.  The ICA explain ed, “[i]f the Dungs could establish that 
the scope of the Easement does not include vehicular use, then 
acts obstructing Ching’s vehicular access to the Easement could 
be considered reasonable and of right.”   
Next, the ICA reviewed all three of Ching’s theories 
upon which her invasion of privacy claim was based, including:  
(1) intrusion upon seclusion; (2) false light; and (3) 
unreasonable publicity.  The ICA also identified three 
categories of actions taken by the Dungs which Ching argued 
supported her claims, including:  (1) videotaping her; (2) 
yelling offensive and derogatory statements about Ching that 
others could hear; and (3) posting derogatory comments, video, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
19 and images about Ching on Denby and Darah Dung’s  Facebook  
(“Dungs s isters’ Facebook”) page .   
The ICA characterized Ching’s intrusion upon seclusion 
theory as being based on the Dungs’ videotaping.  The ICA 
concluded there was no intrusion upon seclusion because the 
video cameras were directed at the easement, which is “a public, 
not a private, place [.]”   
Next, the ICA held that there was insufficient 
evidence to support Ching’s false  light and unreasonable 
publicity claims based on the  Dungs yelling derogatory 
statements at Ching.  The ICA noted that both theories require a 
showing of “unreasonable  publicity” to the “public at large” and 
asserted that the evidence adduced at trial showed only that 
Ching’s male visitors could hear the Dungs’ yelled insults and 
“crude references to sexual conduct.”  According to the ICA, 
“the yelled statements emanati ng from the Dung Property were not 
communications to the ‘public at large’ or ‘to so many persons 
that the matter must be regarded as substantially certain to 
become one of public knowledge.’”  The ICA , however, did find 
the Dungs sisters’ Facebook posting s provided “sufficient 
evidence [of] the publicity requirement” to support a jury 
verdict under  false light and unreasonable publicity theories.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
20 The ICA then reviewed the evidence adduced at trial 
related to the Dungs’ defamatory statements regarding Ching’s 
sexual predilections and concluded that there was sufficient 
“evidence presented” to warrant the “submission of the 
defamation claim to the jury.”  Therefore, the ICA held, the 
circuit court was correct to submit the defamation claim to the 
jury and the verdict should stand.   
For Ching’s civil malicious prosecution claim, the ICA 
addressed:   (1) when Ching stopped her vehicle at the top of the 
easement, got out, and took a photograph of encroachments in the 
easement; and (2) when Ching was sprayed with water by Darah and 
Denby, and sprayed them back.   
As to the first  instance, the ICA noted that the 
Injunction Against Harassment was in effect at the time of the 
incident and the Dungs called the police to report that Ching 
had violated the Injunction by stopping on the easement, causing 
Ching to be arrested and charged with harassment.  According t o 
the ICA, “Ching testified that, at the court hearing she 
attended with counsel, the prosecutor ‘downgraded’ the charge to 
a parking citation to which Ching pleaded guilty[.]”  The ICA 
concluded that Ching had “compromised” or “bought peace” through 
a plea agreement and therefore could not “assert that the 
proceedings . . . terminated in [her] favor.”  Because the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
21 alleged malicious prosecution did not terminate in Ching’s 
favor, the ICA held that the circuit court erred in submitting 
the claim to the jury based on this incident.   
As to the second instance, the ICA noted that Ching 
had admitted at trial that she sprayed Darah and Denby with 
water but testified that Darah and Denby had sprayed her (and 
her washer/dryer) with water before she sprayed them back.  
While the ICA noted that, in this instance, the proceeding had 
terminated in Ching’s favor with her acquittal, the ICA held 
that a prosecutor’s independent determination that there was 
probable cause to proceed broke the chain of causation and 
insulated  the Dungs from liability for malicious prosecution.     
Although not raised on appeal by Ching or the Dungs, 
the ICA reviewed the jury verdict on Ching’s civil conspiracy 
claim and concluded that it must be vacated due to its 
“inability to determine” whi ch underlying tort the civil 
conspiracy claim was based upon.  According to the ICA, “a 
conspiracy claim is not an independent cause of action, but is 
only the mechanism for subjecting co- conspirators to liability 
when one of their members committed a tortious act.”  The ICA 
described Ching’s civil conspiracy claim as “unspecified” and 
thus, vacated  the jury’s civil conspiracy verdict.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
22 After vacating the 
circuit court’s nuisance, invasion 
of privacy, malicious prosecution, and conspiracy judgments , the 
ICA concluded that it was required to vacate the entire damages 
award and remand the case for a new trial because the special 
verdict only provided a lump sum award with no allocation of the 
damages.  The ICA explained that because “only Annette, Denby, 
and Darah’s liability for defamation is being fully affirmed, 
and it is unclear what tortious conduct the jury found to be 
underlying a conspiracy,” the jury’s general verdict cannot be 
sustained.   
The ICA concluded that “the Hawai‘i Supreme Court’s 
decision in Rodrigues . . . is most consistent with the 
application of the Baldwin  rule - which holds that a general 
verdict cannot stand when one or more issues are erroneously 
submitted to a jury.”11  See Maryland v. Baldwin, 112 U.S. 490 
(1884); Rodrigues v. State, 52 Haw. 156, 472 P.2d 509 (1970).  
The ICA declined to “reach the question of whether Hawai‘i courts 
                     
11  In Rodrigues v. State, this court held that:  
 
The award of a lump sum for different claims is not 
reversible error.  However,  failure to state the amount awarded 
for each claim makes it impossible for the reviewing court, 
absent any other indication in the record, to amend the lump sum 
award when it is decided on appeal that error was committed 
concerning the consideration of a particular claim by the 
factfinder, the excessiveness or adequacy of an award, or the 
evidence necessary to sustain an award.   
 
52 Haw. at 175, 472 P.2d at  521.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
23 would apply a ‘strict’ Baldwin standard, or a less restrictive 
approach utilizing a harmless error analysis.”  The ICA reasoned 
that because a nuisance action protects a different interest 
than a defamation action, it could not “ conclude, absent some 
specific indication in the record, that the damages suffered by 
Ching would be the same for both of these injuries
 . . . .”  As 
such, the ICA vacated the jury ’s damage award.    
Ching filed a timely application for writ of 
certiorari on October 11, 2019, and we accepted her application.   
III.  STANDARDS  OF REVIEW 
A. Judicial Admissions and Judicial Estoppel  
A circuit court’s determination that a party is 
entitled to summary judgment based, in part, on a judicial 
admission is reviewed de novo .  See, e.g. , Wells Fargo Bank, 
N.A. v. Omiya, 142 Hawai‘i 439, 45
4, 420 P.3d 370, 385 (2018); 
Lee v. Puamana Cmty.  Ass’n, 109 Hawai‘i 561, 573-74, 128 P.3d 
874, 886-87 (2006).   
The circuit court’s decision to apply the doctrine of 
judicial estoppel to prevent a party from taking “inconsistent 
positions or [from taking] a position in regard to a matter 
which is directly contrary to, or inconsistent with, one 
previously assumed by h im” is reviewed de novo.  See Rosa v. CWJ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
24 Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 218, 664 P.2d 745, 751 
(1983).  
B. Expert Testimony 
“Generally, the decision whether to admit expert 
testimony rests in the discretion of the trial court.  To the 
extent that the trial court ’s decision is dependent upon 
interpretation of court rules, such interpretation is a question 
of law, which [the appellate] court reviews de novo. ”  Barcai v. 
Betwee, 98 Hawai ‘i 470, 479, 50 P.3d 946, 955 (2002) (citations 
omitted). 
C. Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law 
When reviewing the circuit court’s grant or denial of 
a motion for judgment as a matter of law: 
It is well settled that a trial court ’s rulings on 
motions for judgment as a matter of law are reviewed de 
novo. 
 
When we review the granting of a [motion for judgment 
as a matter of law], we apply the same standard as the 
trial court.  
 
A [motion for judgment as a matter of law] may be 
granted only when after disregarding conflicting evidence, 
giving to the non -moving party ’s evidence all the value to 
which it is legally entitled, and indulging every 
legitimate inference which may be drawn from the evidence 
in the non -moving party’ s favor, it can be said that there 
is no evidence to support a jury verdict in his or her 
favor. 
 
 
Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu, 110 Hawai‘i 248, 251, 
131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) (quoting Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai‘ i 
1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514-15 (2004) (internal citations omitted). *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
25 D.
 Rule 403 Exclusion of Evidence  
In State v. West, 95 Hawai‘i 452, 24 P.3d 648 (2001), 
this court stated: 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to 
trial court decisions regarding the admissibility of 
evidence, depending on the requirements of the particular 
rule of evidence at issue.  When application of a 
particular  evidentiary rule can yield only one correct 
result, the proper standard for appellate review is the 
right/wrong standard.  However, the traditional abuse of 
discretion standard should be applied in the case of those 
rules of evidence that require a “judgment call ” on the 
part of the trial court.  
 
Id. at 456-57, 24 P.3d at 652-53 (quoting Kealoha v. Cnty. of 
Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319-20, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993)). 
“A trial court’s determination that evidence is 
‘relevant’ within the meaning of HRE  [(Hawaiʻ i Rules of 
Evidence)] Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong 
standard of review.”  State v. St. Clair , 101 Hawai‘i 280, 286, 
67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003).  
E. Jury Damages Award 
“Generally, we do not disturb the findings of the 
trial court on the issue of damages absent a clearly erroneous 
measure of damages.”  Castro v. Melchor, 142 Hawai ‘i 1, 16, 414 
P.3d 53, 68 (2018) (citations omitted). 
Regarding p unitive damages, the “[a] ward or denial of 
punitive damages is within the sound discretion of the trier of 
fact” and “[a]bsent a clear abuse of discretion, we will not 
reverse a trier of fact’s decision to grant or deny punitive *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
26 damages.”  
Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai‘i 84, 91, 947 P.2d 952, 959 
(1997) (citations omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Judicial Admissions/Estoppel   
The ICA erred in vacating the circuit court’s 
determination that the Dungs judicially admitted to the 
existence of the easement and that its scope included vehicular 
ingress and egress.  The circuit court was also well within its 
discretion to apply the doctrine of judicial estoppel to prevent 
the Dungs from denying the existence of the easement or that its 
scope included vehicular ingress and egress.  A ny error in 
applying the doctrine of judicial admissions and/or judicial 
estoppel was harmless because the parties actually litigated the 
issue, and the jury decided the question of whether the easement 
included vehicular access, pedestrian access, or both.  
This court has consistently held that “a party’s 
factual allegation in a complaint or other pleading is a 
judicial admission which binds the party.”  Int’l Bhd. Of Elec. 
Workers, Local 1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co., 68 Haw. 316, 320 n.2, 
713 P.2d 943, 949 n.2 (1986); see also Lee, 109 Hawai ‘i at 573-
74, 128 P.3d at 886-87.  Notably, Hawai ‘i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (“ HRCP”) Rule 8(b) provides in relevant part that “[a] 
party shall state in short and plain terms defenses to each *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
27 claim asserted and shall admit or deny the averments upon which 
the adverse party relies.”  Likewise, HRCP Rule 8(d) provides in 
relevant part that “[a]verments in a pleading to which a 
responsive pleading is required, other than those as to the 
amount of damage, are admitted when not denied in the responsive 
pleading.”  Together, HRCP Rules 8(b) and 8(d) demonstrate that 
a party may admit a fact at issue in a lawsuit by failing to 
deny a specific averment in the Answer to a Complaint, which 
removes the admitted fact from the field of controversy.  See  
Lee, 109 Hawai ‘i 
at 573, 128 P.3d at  886 (holding that a 
“judicial admission is ‘a formal statement, either by [a] party 
or his or her attorney, in [the] course of [a] judicial 
proceeding [that] removes an admitted fact from [the] field of 
controversy.
’”).   
It is incongruous with HRCP  Rule 8 to require that a 
trial court conduct an inquiry into the factual foundation of 
every admission made by parties in their pleadings prior to 
allowing that admission to be removed from the field of 
controversy.  The 
difficulty  of conducting an inquiry into the 
factual foundation of every admission is especially apparent 
considering that a party may make an admission simply by failing 
to deny an averment, in which case the inquiring court would 
have no factual foundation to review. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
28 Here, the Dungs voluntarily and explicitly admitted 
“the
 fact” that the easement “was for access and the reasonable 
loading and unloading of material from [Ching’s] property” in 
their Answer to the 2007 Complaint: 
All of the answers are to take into consideration the fact  
that the Defendants have always fully accepted the idea of an 
easement for ingress and egress consistent with the easement 
described in the applicable Land Court documents with two 
exceptions:  (a) at the point where the easement joins Hoonanea 
Street, the utility company and the county had erected a pole and 
signs that prevented access to the easement without trespassing 
onto the property of the Defendants . . . (b) the fact that while 
the easement was for access and the reasonable loading and 
unloading of material from the Plaintiffs’ property, it did not 
allow the parking of vehicles or the placing of stationary 
material on the easement so as to interfere with the Defendant ’s 
use of the easement after the actual loading and unloading were 
accomplished.   
 
Later, Dungs’ counsel confirmed that the Dungs were referring to 
“vehicles” when they admitted that the easement was for “loading 
and unloading” in their Answer.   
Additionally, the 2007 and 2013 lawsuits were 
consolidated at the Dungs’ request and thus, are a single 
proceeding.  In their Opening Brief before the ICA, the Dungs 
argued that they could not be held to admissions made in the 
2007 litigation because it was a separate and distinct 
proceeding that involved “different issues” from the 2013 
litigation.  Whether two lawsuits that are later consolidated 
should be treated as a single proceeding for purposes of 
judicial admissions and/or judicial estoppel is
 a novel quest ion 
under Hawai ‘i Law
.  However, this court need not address this *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
29 question because the Dungs filed the Motion to Consolidate upon 
which the court’s Consolidation Order ruled .  In their Motion to 
Consolidate, the Dungs argued that the two cases had  “nearly 
identical” parties, “undeniably involve a common question []” of 
law, and similar questions of fact.  The circuit court granted 
the Dungs’ request to consolidate the two actions.  As such, the 
2007 and 2013 litigation 
is treated as the “same proceeding” for  
purposes of judicial admissions and judicial estoppel.  
Although related to the doctrine of judicial 
admissions, the doctrine of judicial estoppel is a distinct 
legal doctrine that “partakes . . . of positive rules of 
procedure based on manifest justice and, to a greater or 
less[er] degree, on considerations of the orderliness, 
regularity, and expedition of litigation.”  Roxas v. Marcos, 89 
Hawai‘i 91, 124, 969 P.2d 1209, 1242 (1998).  The doctrine of 
judicial estoppel provides that:  
[a] party will not be permitted to maintain inconsistent 
positions or to take a position in regard to a matter which 
is directly contrary to, or inconsistent with, one 
previously assumed by him, at least where he had, or was 
chargeable with, full knowledge of the facts, and ano
ther 
will be prejudiced by his action.  
 
Id.  The “doctrine prevents parties from playing ‘fast and 
loose’ with the court or ‘blowing hot and cold’ during the 
course of litigation.”  Id.  Under the doctrine of judicial 
estoppel, a party must demonstrate tha t:  (1) the other party’s *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
30 later position is “clearly inconsistent” with its earlier 
position; (2) the other party succeeded in persuading a court to
accept its earlier position; and (3) the 
other party would 
derive an advantage for itself or impose a detriment on the 
opposing party if not estopped.  Lee , 109 Hawai ʻi at 576, 128 
P.3d at 889 (quoting New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 750 –
51 (2001)).  
The Dungs’ repeated changes of position satisfy all 
three parts of the above test and support Ching’s assertion of 
judicial estoppel.  First, the Dungs ’ position in the 2007 
litigation, that “the easement was for access and the reasonable 
loading and unloadin g of material from the Plaintiffs’ 
property[,]” is “clearly inconsistent” with their position in 
the 2013 litigation, that the “easement does not exist” or if it 
does exist, the easement is only for “pedestrian use.”  Second, 
the Dungs succeeded in persuading the court, as well as Ching 
and her lawyers, to accept their earlier position with respect 
to the existence and scope of the easement.  In a letter to the 
court following Ching’s initiation of the 2007 lawsuit, the 
Dungs reiterated their original position —that the easement 
existed and included vehicular access —and asserted that “there 
is no need to request injunctive relief through the Courts.”  
Moreover, a multitude of related judicial rulings including *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
31 rulings at the 
district court,12 circuit court,13 and the ICA14 
relied on the Dungs’ original position that the easement exists 
and includes vehicular access.  Third, the Dungs have realized 
multiple benefits and advantages from their original position.  
The Dungs convinced Ching to stop pursuing her 2007 suit based 
on their representation as to the existence and scope of the 
easement.  The Dungs avoided costly litigation of the multiple 
claims that Ching had asserted in the 2007 suit and also 
succeeded in convincing Ching to stop pursuing a TRO requesting 
injunctive relief against the Dungs.  Likewise, Ching has 
suffered multiple legal and pecuniary detriments in reliance on 
the Dungs’ original position.  Following the Dungs’ Answer to 
the 2007 Complaint and their accompanying letter in which they 
represented that the parties had come to a resolution, Ching 
spent money to build a carport on her property and connect it to 
her easement over the Dungs’ driveway .  Thus, Ching has met the 
requirements for asserting judicial estoppel to estop the Dungs 
                     
12  At the district court proceedings on Annette ’s TRO and Injunction 
Against Harassment, Judge Kawashima relied on the Dungs’ position in ruling 
that Ching could not stop, park, walk, or otherwise use the easement apart 
from non- stop vehicular travel from Hoonanea Street to her property.   
 
13  Judge Castagnetti relied on the Dungs ’ position that the easement 
existed and included vehicular access when she ordered the Dungs to remove 
the obstructions that they had placed on Ching’s easement.   
 
14  In the ICA’s summary disposition order affirming the district 
court’s Injunction Agains t Harassment against Ching, the court stated that:  
“On appeal, the Dungs do not deny the existence of the Easement.”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
32 from denying that the easement exists and includes vehicular 
access.   
Moreover, t he jury decided the issue of whether the 
easement includes  pedestrian access, vehicular access, or both, 
so any error committed by the circuit court with respect to 
judicial estoppel and judicial admissions was harmless.  The 
jury instructions that were read to the jury instructed:  “that 
Plaintiff has a 12 foot wide access easement over the 
Defendants’ property.  It is for the jury to decide whether the 
permitted access includes pedestrian use, vehicular use, or 
both.”  Another jury instruction provided that:  “[t]he nature 
and scope of an easement is to be determined by the intention of 
the creator of the easement and the facts and circumstances at 
the time of its creation.  It cannot be unilaterally increased 
or decreased beyond the right originally intended to be 
granted.”  These instructions demonstrate that the jury was 
charged with determining the scope of the easement.  
Additionally, the jury’s special verdict form specifically as ked 
whether the scope of the easement included vehicular access, 
pedestrian access, or both.  The jury indicated on the special 
verdict form  that the easement provides both pedestrian and 
vehicular use.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
33 The fact that the jury actually determined the scope
 
of the easement renders any potential error that the circuit 
court made in ruling on judicial estoppel and/or judicial 
admissions harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   
B. Nuisance and  Expert Testimony 
The ICA relied on its determination that the circuit 
court erred in judicially estopping the Dungs from denying the 
existence and scope of the easement when it vacated the jury’s 
nuisance verdict and overturned the circuit court’s limitations 
on the Dungs’ expert witness testimony.  Because the ICA erred 
in its ruling on judicial admissions/estoppel, the jury’s 
nuisance verdict and the circuit court’s ruling on expert 
testimony are reinstated.  
C. Civil Conspiracy  
The ICA erred in vacating the jury’s civil conspiracy 
verdict because the issue was waived,  and the ci rcuit court is 
deemed to have made the necessary finding under HRCP Rule 49.   
Under HRCP Rule 49(a) (2000), the court may require a 
jury to return a special verdict in the form that “it deems most 
appropriate” and, if the court “omits any issue of fact ra ised 
by the pleadings or by the evidence, each party waives the right 
to a trial by jury of the issue so omitted” unless that “party 
demands its submission to the jury.”   HRCP Rule 49(a).  If a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
34 party fails to make such a demand, the court “may make a 
finding; or, if it fails to do so, it shall be deemed to have 
made a finding in accord with the judgment on the special 
verdict.”  Id.    
Under HRCP Rule 49(a), if the Dungs sought to 
challenge the special verdict on civil conspiracy, they were 
required to demand that the court require the jury to identify 
the underlying tort upon which the civil conspiracy claim was 
based.  Because they failed to do so, the trial court is deemed 
to have made the necessary finding in accord with the judgment 
on the special verdict.  As such, the trial court should be 
deemed to have found the civil conspiracy was based on an 
underlying tort.   
The jury’s civil conspiracy verdict was based on the 
underlying tort of nuisance.  Notably, the special verdict form 
listed all five Dungs (Annette, Dixon, Dean, Denby, and Darah) 
as having been “engaged in the civil conspiracy against” Ching.  
The only other cause of action for which the jury found all five 
Dungs liable was the nuisance claim.   
Ching argued that the Dungs were in a conspiracy to 
engage in nuisance against her.  T he jury’s matching verdicts 
for nuisance and conspiracy demonstrate that nuisance was the 
underlying tort for  the civil conspiracy verdict.  Therefore, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
35 the ICA erred when
 it vacated  the jury’s civil conspirac y 
verdict based on its “inability to determine” the underlying 
tort.  The civil conspiracy verdict is reinstated.   
D.
 District Court Injunction Against Harassment  
The ICA erred when it ruled that the circuit court 
abused its discretion by excluding from the jury’s consideration  
the district court’s Injunction Against Harassment .  The circuit 
court determined that the probative value of the Injunction 
Against Harassment was substantially outweighed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice under Hawai ‘i Rules of Evid ence (“HRE”) Rule 
403.15  The ICA concluded that the circuit court ’s weighing of 
the evidence constituted an abuse of discretion. 
To abuse its discretion, the circuit court must have 
“clearly exceed[ed] the bounds of reason or disregard[ed] rules 
or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of 
a party litigant.”  Samson v. Nahulu, 136 Hawai ‘i 415, 425, 363 
P.3d 263, 273 (2015) (quoting State v. Ganal, 81 Hawai‘i 358, 
                     
15  HRE Rule 403 provides:  
Rule 403 Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of 
prejudice, confusion, or waste of time.  Although relevant, 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the 
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue 
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative 
evidence.   HRE Rule 403 (2010).  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
36 373, 917 P.2d 370, 385 (1996).  B ased on our review of the 
record, the circuit court did not “exceed the bounds of reason,” 
“disregard rules or principles of law,” and the Dungs did not 
suffer a substantial detriment.   
The record demonstrates that the circuit court neither 
“clearly exceed[ed] the bounds of reason” nor “disre gard[ed] 
rules or principles of law to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant.”   
First, the circuit court did not “exceed[] the bounds 
of reason.”  The circuit court carefully considered the issue 
and provided extensive explanations on the record to support its 
determination under the HRE Rule 403 balancing test that the 
probative value of the Injunction Against Harassment was 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.  
After arguments from both Ching and the Dungs, the court ruled 
that the limited record regarding the Injunction Against 
Harassment trial and the possible confusion the Injunction 
Against Harassment could create for jurors counseled against 
admitting the Injunction Against Harassment.  In particular, the 
circuit court ruled:  
Exhibit A- 2 for identification is an adjudication by 
Judge Kawashima in a District Court trial regarding a 
harassment charge.  Harassment is a particular charge that 
is statutorily defined.  I don’t know what all the evidence 
was.  I don’t know othe r than a few cryptic remarks about 
what Judge Kawashima said in his transcript wherein he 
concluded that a charge of harassment was proven.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
37  
So on the record at this time, it’s the conclusion of 
the Court that the danger that the jurors, who are 
struggling  to try to understand everything, could unfairly 
latch on to Exhibit A -2 for identification, which is the 
injunction against harassment that was issued by Judge 
Kawashima in the District Court, and simply come to the 
conclusion, Well, that’s an adjudicatio n by one court, that 
judge must be right, it doesn’t say what Donna Ching did or 
didn’t do, but she’s found guilty, so she must be guilty of 
everything.  
 
And I think that’s the danger Judge Kawashima tried 
to steer clear of in his ruling 
-- is to not prejudice the 
outcome of this trial, because he was aware that this trial 
was pending.  So that would be undue prejudice under 403 
that this Court is not permitted to allow.     
 
The ICA opined  that a “curative instruction could be crafted to 
address concerns regarding prejudice.”   In fact, the circuit  
court specifically addressed the potential for a curative 
instruction and determined that the risk of confusion and unfair 
prejudice would nevertheless substantially outweigh the 
probative value of the Injunction Against Harassment.  
 
The ICA implied that the circuit court abused its 
discretion because it allowed into evidence the circuit court’s 
Preliminary Injunction in favor of Ching (that required the 
Dungs to remove the obstructions that they had constructed on 
the easement) while disallowing the admission of the district 
court’s Injunction Against Harassment in favor of the Dungs .  
However, the balance between probative and prejudicial value is 
not equivalent as applied to the Injunction 
Against Harassment 
and the Preliminary Injunction.  The Injunction Against 
Harassment was entered pursuant to a limited record, without a *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
38 jury, and without discovery.  
Moreover, the  Injunction Against 
Harassment established that a judge determined that Ching had 
“harassed” the Dungs, an issue confusingly close to the question 
of “easement misuse” that the jury was charged with deciding in 
the instant case.16  In contrast, the circuit court’s Preliminary 
Injunction, only established that the Dungs were required to 
keep open the gate that they had built at the bottom of their 
driveway, which is not at issue in the instant case
.  For these 
reasons, the circuit court did not abuse
 its discretion by 
allowing in the Preliminary Injunction while excluding the 
Injunction Against Harassment.  
The circuit court also did not abuse its discretion by 
“disregard[ing] rules or principles of law to the substantial 
detriment of” the Dungs.  The  ICA implied  that the Dungs were 
unable to explain the basis for their frequent 911 calls without 
entering the actual Injunction Against Harassment into evidence.  
In fact, the Dungs introduced substantial evidence at trial to 
explain why they were calling the police, with multiple Dung 
witnesses mentioning the “TRO ,” “Injunction ,” and “restraining 
order” against Ching repeatedly throughout trial.  Evidence, 
                     
16  Question No. 17 on the Special Verdict Form asked:  “Did 
plaintiff misuse her easement rights?”  Similarly, question No. 18 on the 
Special Verdict Form asked:  “Did plaintiff intentionally inflict emotional 
distress upon any defendant?”   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
39 such as 911 calls17 made by Annette, the member of the Dung 
family who applied for the TRO, refer to the TRO and explain 
that she was calling to enforce the TRO preventing Ching from 
stopping on the easement.  Annette also testified that once she 
obtained the TRO she began calling the police on Ching for 
incidences such as not closing the gate.  Annette  described the 
scope of the TRO and used it to justify her 911 call to report 
utility trucks using the easement to service Ching’s house.  
Annette’s entire TRO application, including all of her 
allegations against Ching, was read into the record.  The TRO 
application was also published to the jury.  Darah also 
testified extensively as to the TRO, and described helping her 
mom, Annette, write out the application.   Later, Darah said 
“[a]n easement isn’t supposed to be used as a tool for 
harassment.”  Denby also discussed the TRO and said “[a]s I made 
clear earlier, we didn’t call every time she harassed us.  But 
if we did call, it was because she was harassing us .”  Moreover, 
Denby testified that “it hasn’t gotten better, even after the 
TRO . . . so why do we make 911 calls?  We don’t want to call 
every day.  We don’t want to keep telling them.  What else do we 
do?”  Denby further testified that “[d]efinitely after the TRO 
was in place, because she couldn’t come on our property and she 
                     
17  During trial, the parties often referred to the Injunction 
Against Harassment as the “TRO,” also known as a temporary restraining order.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
40 couldn’t stop on our pro perty, so then she started driving up 
with her cell phone outside of her car because then she wouldn’t 
technically stop.”  Denby continued, “[o]h, I’m sorry.  This is 
before the TRO, so she still was able to stop.”   
Ching also testified that after Annette ’s TRO was 
granted against her, police came on “too many occasions.”  She 
described one occasion where an officer showed up at her door 
and “said that he was arresting me for violating a protective 
order . . . [because] I harassed the Dungs by stopping on the 
driveway and taking pictures.”  The Dungs’ counsel, also asked 
Ching, “let’s move back to that TRO violation or the protective 
order violation; correct?  You remember that?  You were arrested 
for that?”  Later, Dungs’ counsel  asked Ching , “[t]here were two 
TROs that were filed that got consolidated in the District 
Court; correct?  You filed one against Denby, Dean, and Darah, 
correct?  And Annette Dung filed one against you; correct?”   
These numerous examples demonstrate that  the Dungs did 
not suffer a substantial detriment due to the exclusion of the 
Injunction Against Harassment because they were repeatedly 
allowed to refer to it  and used it to explain why they thought 
they were entitled to report alleged violations of the 
Injunction Against Harassment to the police.  Accordingly, the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
41 (continued . . .)  ICA erred in determining that the ci
rcuit court abused its 
discretion in excluding the Injunction Against Harassment.  
E. Invasion of Privacy  
Ching’s invasion of privacy claim was based on three 
legal theories:  (1) intrusion upon seclusion; (2) false light; 
and (3) unreasonable publicity.  The ICA erred when it ruled 
that the circuit court improperly submitted Ching’s invasion of 
privacy claim to the jury on the theory of intrusion upon 
seclusion.  However, the ICA ultimately reached the correct 
decision when it declined to vacate the jury’s verdict on 
Ching’s invasion of privacy claim because it found that there 
was sufficient evidence to support the claim under false light 
and unreasonable publicity.  Because, ultimately, the ICA 
correctly decided the invasion of privacy claim, its error in 
concluding that there was insufficient evidence to submit the 
invasion of privacy claim under Ching’s theory of intrusion upon 
seclusion will not be addressed in this O pinion.18  
                     
18  The ICA’s determination that the circuit court erred by denying 
the Dungs’ JMOL with respect to Ching’s invasion of privacy claim based on 
the theory of intrusion upon seclusion appears to have been based upon an 
erroneous review of the record.  The ICA held that the Dungs’ invasions of 
Ching’s privacy by videotaping her could not support the jury’s verdict 
because the recordings of Ching took place on the easement and in her 
driveway and these were “public, not []private” places and therefore “the 
recordings were not of anything outside of the public gaze.”  The ICA failed 
to note evidence, adduced at trial, showing that the Dungs’ v ideo cameras did  
intrude into a private place —Ching’s bedroom and backyard.  Ching testified 
at trial that one of the three cameras that the Dungs installed on their wall 
facing her property captures images that cover most of her property including  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
42 F.
 Malicious Prosecution  
The ICA erred when it held  there was insufficient 
evidence adduced at trial to support the jury’s finding that the 
Dungs engaged in malicious prosecution.  There are two instances 
that were the bases  of Ching’s  malicious prosecution claim :  (1) 
Ching was arrested for harassment and the prosecutor 
“immediately downgraded” the charge to a parking citation to 
which Ching pleaded guilty and (2) when Ching was allegedly 
sprayed with water by Darah and Denby,  and Ching sprayed them 
back (“water spraying incident”) .  For the water spraying 
incident, Ching was arrested but was acquitted at trial.   
In order to prove  a civil claim of malicious 
prosecution in a civil trial, the plaintiff must demonstrate 
that the prior proceedings:  (1) were terminated in the 
plaintiffs’ favor; (2) were initiated without probable cause; 
and (3) were initiated with malice.  Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 
119 Hawaiʻi 403, 417, 198 P.3d 666, 680 (2008) .  
The ICA incorrectly held that Ching’s claim of  
malicious prosecution for the water spraying incident should not 
have been submitted to the jury.  Ching demonstrated that the 
prosecution for the water spraying incident
 was terminated in 
                     
(continued . . .)  
 
her tenant’s entire home as well as Ching’s home including her bedroom window 
and her backyard.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
43 her favor, and that the prosecution for the water spraying 
incident was initiated without probable cause and with malice.  
See id. 
First, Ching was acquitted at trial for the water 
spraying incident.  Second, the Dungs initiated the prosecution 
without probable cause and with malice because the evidence 
indicates that the Dungs presented false testimony or withheld 
evidence.   
Though closing argument is not evidence, it identifies
evidence introduced during trial that supports the jury’s 
verdict.  Cf. State v. Basham, 132 Hawaiʻi 97, 113, 319 P.3d 
1105, 1121 (2014), as corrected (Feb. 11, 2014) (
closing 
arguments should only refer to evidence in the record).  Here, 
in closing argument regarding the water spraying incident, 
Ching’s counsel argued in part that the Dungs  engaged in civil 
malicious prosecution because the Dungs  had cameras where the 
alleged “harassment” took place but did not introduce video of 
the incident to support their story and because Denby’s  and 
Darah’s testimonies conflicted .  In particular, Ching’s “exhibit
88” provides minutes that support Ching’s  counsel’s contention
that Ching was acquitted, in part, because of Denby ’s and 19 
 
 
                     
19  The record from the harassment trial, where Ching was acquitted, 
is limited.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
44 Darah’s false and conflicting testimon ies.  The August 26, 2014 
minutes provide: 
ORALLY CHARGED/NOT GUILTY PLEA ENTERED.  TRIAL 
COMMENCED, CD: 7A/#35: 1:42/2:31:26 -.  STATE’S W ITNESS:  1) 
DENBY DUNG (2:41:58 -2:50/2:58 -3:05).  TESTIMONY PAUSED AND 
WITNESS ASKED TO WAIT OUTSIDE OF COURTROOM WHILE DISCUSSION 
BETWEEN COUNSELS AND COURT.  
ORAL MOTION TO DISMISS ENTERED BY DEFENSE.  CASE CONTINUED 
FOR BRIEFS AND DECISION  
WITH FURTHER TRIAL 8/29/14PM -7A BEFORE JUDGE PACARRO.  
 
The above minutes show that Denby’s testimony was “paused” and 
she “was asked to wait outside[,]” after which Ching made an 
“oral motion to dismiss[.]”  The minutes also demonstrate that 
Ching did not testify in her own defense or put on any other 
witnesses.   
 
 Additionally, in the record, the Dungs acknowledged 
that they had cameras showing the area where the alleged 
“harassment” took place but did not introduce video of the 
incident to support their story that Ching harassed Denby and 
Darah by spraying them with water.   
The ICA is correct  that a prosecutor’s decision to 
bring charges in a criminal proceeding insulates the complainant 
from tort liability for malicious prosecution.  Bullen v. 
Derego, 68 Haw. 587, 593, 724 P.2d 106, 110 (1986).  However, 
the complainant is only insulated when there is no allegation 
that the defendant presented false evidence, withheld evidence, 
or exerted influence on the prosecutor.  Here, Ching did allege *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
45 (and produce evidence) that the Dungs presented false
 evidence 
and also withheld evidence, thus negating the “insulation” 
provided by the prosecutor’s “independent determination of 
probable cause.”  As such, Ching provided sufficient evidence to 
meet the second and third elements of malicious prosecution in 
addition to the first element,  which she met when she was 
acquitted of the charged offense.  Therefore, the ICA erred when 
it held that Ching’s malicious prosecution claim was not 
supported by sufficient evidence to uphold the jury’s verdict 
and when it concluded that the circuit court erred in denying 
the Dungs’ motion for JMOL on the ma licious prosecution claim.  
 
G. General Verdict Rule 
Following the ICA’s decision to vacate the judgment 
with respect to Ching’s nuisance, invasion of privacy, malicious 
prosecution, and conspiracy claims, the ICA vacated the jury’s 
entire damage award because it was unable to determine whether 
the jury relied on an “improper ground” when awarding the 
damages.  Because the ICA incorrectly vacated the jury’s 
judgment with respect to Ching’s nuisance, invasion of privacy, 
malicious prosecution, and conspiracy claims, this court need 
not answer the question of whether the jury relied on an 
“improper ground,” as the jury’s damages award is affirmed.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
46    /s/ Jeffrey P. Crabtree  V. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the ICA’s 
September 16, 2019 Judgment on Appeal vacating the circuit 
court’s September 15, 2016 Judgment, November 14, 2016 Order 
Denying Additur, April 12, 2016 Order re JMOL, January 4, 2017 
Order Denying Further JMOL, and January 4, 2017 Order Denying 
New Trial, and reinstate the jury’s damage award . 
Terrance M. Revere   
Malia R. Nickison-Beazley  
Jonathan L. Ortiz   
Wade J. Katano 
Christine S. Prepose- Kamihara
for Petitioner   /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Todd W. Eddins 
/s/ John M. Tonaki 
 
 
  
 
      
Ronald Shigekane
David J. Minkin
 
Jesse J.T. Smith
for Respondents  
 
 
 
CONCURRENCE BY CIRCUIT JUDGE CRABTREE 
 
 I respectfully concur with the result.  
   