 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I  
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, MCKENNA, AND POLLACK JJ., AND 
CIRCUIT JUDGE PERKINS, IN PLACE OF ACOBA, J  ., RECUSED  
 
  
   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-30475 08-OCT-2015 
08:51 AM 
---oOo--
-
KA‘UPULEHU LAND LLC, a Hawai‘ i lim ited liability company,  
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee,  
 
vs.  
 
HEIRS AND ASSIGNS OF PAHUKULA (k); et al.,  
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants.  
SCWC-30475  
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT  OF APPEALS
  
(ICA NO. 30475; CIV. NO. 08
-1-0023K)
 
OCTOBER 8, 2015
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This case involves 
a title dispute between 
Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellee Ka‘ upulehu Land LLC (“KLL”) and 
Respondents/Defendants-Appellants Heirs and Assigns of Pahukula, 
et al. (collectively “Defendants”), stemming from KLL’s 
“Complaint to Quiet Title” to the follo wing property:   
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
                     
  
 All of that certain parcel of land (being all of the 
land(s) described in and covered by Royal Patent Number 
6667, Land Commission Award Number 8723, Apana 1 to 
Kahoiwai) situate, lying and being at Mahukona, District of 
Kohala, Island and County of Hawaii, State of Hawaii, 
bearing Tax Key designation (3) 5 -7-002:004, and containing 
an area of approximately 11.746 acres, more or less. 
(“Property”).1 
Despite having obtained the Property through paper title 
derived from a common grantor, KLL claims that it and 
Defendants’ title to the Property is defective because the 
common grantor had actually sold the Property prior to his 
death. KLL claims that neither it nor Defendants received valid title to the Property. KLL claims that it is therefore entitled 
to one-hundred percent (100%) of the Property through adverse 
possession. In the alternative, KLL claims that if title to the 
Property descended to the common grantor ’s heirs, it is a 
cotenant with Defendants. 
Defendants, on the other hand, argue that they and KLL are 
cotenants because they both received their interests in the Property through a series of conveyances stemming from the 
common grantor. 
We hold that the evidence presented by KLL was not 
sufficient to establish that the common grantor was not vested with title to the Property when he died. Therefore, title to 
1 The acreage differs slightly from the description in the 
“Certificate of Title” prepared by Title Guaranty of Hawaii, Inc. (“Title 
Guarantee Certificate”), which described the Property as containing “11.300 
acres, more or less.” 
2
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
                     
   the Property descended in accordance with the law in effect at 
the time of the common g rantor’s death to his heirs.  We further 
hold that Defendants and KLL are cotenants, having received 
interests in the Property through mesne conveyances stemming 
from the common grantor. Accordingly, the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (“ICA”) erred in finding that there was a genuine issue 
of material fact with respect to the existence of a cotenancy. 
We therefore vacate the ICA’s January 9, 2014 Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s March 25, 2010 Final Judgment, and remand this case to the circuit court for a determination of 
interests in title to the Property. 
II. Background 
A. Facts 
Land Commission Award No. 8723 and Royal Patent No. 6667 
were issued for the Property to Kahoiwai in 1851 and 1875 
respectively. In 1885, Kahoiwai deeded the Property to his son, 
Kaehuokekai, also known as David Hukai Kahoiwai (“David”). 
David died intestate on December 13, 1903. His estate was 
probated on August 24, 1904, where the court determined that 
David had four heirs: two sisters, Kenoiaina and Miliama;
2 a 
brother, Pahukula; and Pua, a minor niece. Under the intestacy laws in effect at the time of David’s death, each heir would 
2 Miliama was also known as Miriama. 
3
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 have received a 1/4 interest in David’s estate as Revised Laws 
of Hawai‘ i (RLH) § 2106 (1898) provided that “[i] f [the 
intestate] shall leave no issue, nor father, nor mother, his 
estate shall descend one-half to his widow, and the other half 
to his brothers and sisters, and to the children of any deceased 
brother or sister by right of representation.” As explained in 
further detail in Part II below, the administrator of David’s 
estate testified in the probate court that the Property had 
“upon information been sold during [David’s] lifetime [,]” so the 
Inventory he prepared reflected that David had no real property subject to distribution through probate.  No conveyance 
document, however, was ever adduced. Therefore, David’s heirs 
did not receive any interests in the Property through the 
probate proceeding. 
While probate was pending, however, three of David’s four 
heirs proceeded to convey interests in the Property. A chart of 
these conveyances is reflected in the attached Addendum. As can 
be seen, through a series of conveyances, KLL obtained an 
interest in the Property through one of David’s heirs, Miliama. 
Miliama conveyed “all of [her] interest” in David’s estate to 
her son, Samuel (“Sam”) Keanu, in 1906. Sam conveyed “all [of 
his] right and title and interest” in the Property to Joseph 
4
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
                     
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  Iseke in 1914.3 Joseph Iseke conveyed “[a]ll of his undivided 
interest, representing not less than a 1/3 undivided interest” 
in the Property to Richard Smart by warranty exchange deed in 
41961.
In 1988, despite allegedly receiving only a 1/3 interest 
himself, Richard Smart purported to convey the entire Property to the Richard Smart Revocable Personal Trust by quitclaim deed. 
In 2002, the Richard Smart Revocable Personal Trust conveyed a 
number of properties including a purported 100% interest in the 
Property by land trust deed to the Parker Land Trust.
5 In 2004, 
the Parker Land Trust conveyed four properties purportedly including the entire Property by quitclaim deed to KLL. 
According to the Title Guarantee Certificate issued to KLL 
in 2007, Miliama’s interest in the Property “descends straight 
and unbroken to” KLL from August 3, 1961, the date of the Joseph 
3 Sam’s interest in the Property was c onveyed to a “Joseph Isaacs.” 
No conveyance of record appears under the name Joseph Isaacs; however, a deed 
dated August 3, 1961 conveys a 1/3 interest in the Property from Joseph 
“Iseke” to Richard Smart. 
4 It is unclear how Joseph Iseke was able to convey a 1/3 interest 
if he received his interest through a series of mesne conveyances from 
Miliama, who would have received only a 1/4 interest in the Property through 
intestacy. 
5 There is a mark indicating that the Property was recorded in the 
“Land Court System”; however, the Bureau of Conveyances stamp appears in the “Regular System” portion of the deed. The deed that conveys the Property 
from Parker Land Trust to KLL was recorded in the “Regular System.” Neither 
KLL nor Defendants assert that the Property is Land Court property. 
5
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
                     
  
 Iseke to Richard Smart deed, to June 15, 2004, the date KLL 
received its interest in the Property.6 
David’s heir Pahukula died intestate without conveying an 
interest in the Property and without a probate proceeding of his 
estate or a judicial determination of his heirs.  The record, 
however, includes a deed from Pahukula to his son, Henry C. 
Hapai, that was recorded with the Registrar of Conveyances in 
September 1910. In this deed, Pahukula conveyed his “undivided 
interest in the estate of [his] father/uncle Kahoiwai[,]” which 
included a property on Maui specifically described in the deed.  
Pahukula conveyed only his interest in the Maui property, and 
not any interest in the Property. Therefore, the status of 
Pahukula’s interest, if any, remains unclear. 
The remaining half of the Property descended to William P. 
McDougall (“McDougall”). Kenoiaina deeded “all” of her “right, 
title, interest and estate . . . in and to” the Property to 
McDougall in 1907. In 1908, David’s heir Pua deeded her “ right 
to [her] share of” the property to H.L. Holstein, the attorney 
of record for David’s heir s throughout the probate proceeding, 
who conveyed “all” of his “right, title, interest and estate in 
and to” the Property to McDougall in 1909. 
6 Notably, the maximum liability of the Title Guarantee Certificate 
is limited to one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
6
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
 
 
 McDougall died intestate in 1935. McDougall’s probate 
proceeding inventory did not contain any real estate holdings.  
No judicial determination was made of McDougall’s heirs; 
however, according to the Title Guarantee Certificate, Bureau of 
Health Statistics records reveal that McDougall had a son, 
Albert McDougall, who died at the age of 37 in 1923, twelve 
years before the elder McDougall’s death. The record further 
reveals that Albert had a wife, Mary McDougall, who died in 
1935, leaving four minor children: Walter, Hazzerd, Nani, and 
George McDougall. The Defendants in this case are McDougall’s 
great-grandchildren, who had not heard about the Property, but who may have an interest in the Property through McDougall. 
B.	 Circuit Court Proceedings 
On January 25, 2008, KLL commenced its quiet title action. 
KLL claimed title to the Property on alternative grounds.  First, KLL claimed title to 100% of the Property through adverse 
possession. In the alternative, KLL claimed a cotenancy with Defendants as record owner pursuant to the 2004 quitclaim deed 
from Parker Land Trust. 
1.	 KLL’s Motion for Default Judgment and/or Summary 
Judgment 
On December 3, 2009, KLL filed a motion for default and/or 
summary judgment. KLL argued that it had title to 100% of the 
Property by adverse possession due to an alleged “break in the 
7
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  chain of title that gives rise to claims of paper title by both 
[KLL] and [Defendants].” KLL contended that David sold the 
Property prior to his death, and thus, neither party could claim 
paper title through David’s heirs. 
KLL admitted that there was no record of any conveyance 
made by or under the name of Kaehuokekai or his alias David 
Hukai Kahoiwai; however, KLL asserted that David’s probate 
records constitute prima facie evidence that David sold the 
Property before he died.  The probate records KLL noted include 
the Inventory of David’s estate, filed on February 14, 1905, in 
which E.A. Fraser, a creditor and the administrator of David’s estate stated under oath that “certain kuleana #8723 in the name 
of Kahoiwai situate at Pulehu near Mahukona and which belonged 
to deceased had upon information been sold during lifetime of 
said Kahoiwai.” The Inventory further provided that the only 
property remaining in David’s possession at the time of his 
death was 10 shares in ‘Ewa Plantation, stating “None” for real 
estate held by David. 
In addition, KLL noted other records in the probate 
proceeding that allegedly support its position, including (1) 
clerk’s minutes entered on February 2, 1906 wherein the clerk 
wrote, “Sam Keanu [] makes an appearance as a claimant to real 
8
    
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
                     
  
 
  
 
 estate which he claims Kahoiwai owned and sold[;]”7 (2) Schedule 
A of the Final Accounts filed on September 13, 1905, which 
states that the estate’s only asset was “$314.50” derived from 
the sale of the ‘ Ewa Plantation Stock; (3) a master audit report 
filed on August 30, 1917 (i.e., twelve years after the opening 
of probate), which confirms the Final Accounts as “correct[;]” 
and (4) a power of attorney signed by all four heirs in which 
the heirs “accept as correct” the clerk’s accounting of the 
assets and liabilities of the estate. 
In further support of its adverse possession claim, KLL 
argued that it and its predecessors in interest (1) continuously 
used the Property for ranching operations since 1961; (2) controlled access onto the Property by posting “no trespassing” 
signs; (3) maintained fences, walls, gates, and chains; and (4) 
excluded trespassers from the area. 
In support of these assertions,   KLL submitted a number of 
declarations from individuals familiar with ranching operations 
conducted on the Property.  Declarations were submitted for 
Melvin B. Hewitt (“Hewitt”), a retired trustee of the Richard Smart Revocable Personal Trust and the Land Trust Agreement for 
7 It is unclear why Sam Keanu made this statement as he was making 
an appearance as a claimant to the Property he obtained from Miliama, one of 
David’s heirs. In addition, the clerk’s minutes from February 5, 1906 note 
that a certified copy of the deed from Miliama to Sam Keanu was filed in the 
probate proceeding. 
9
    
 
 
                     
  
 the Parker Ranch Foundation Trust, Masa Kawamoto (“Kawamoto”), a 
rancher and resident of the area since 1922 who had been 
employed by Parker Ranch as a foreman from 1937-1967, Harry M. 
Von Holt (“Holt”) and Herbert M. Richards, Jr. (“Richards”), 
ranchers and residents of the area since 1948 and 1955, 
respectively, and John Metzler (“Metzler”), a managing member of 
KLL.  
Hewitt, Holt, and Richards stated that Richard Smart had 
purchased the Property in 1961 and used it continuously for ranching operations by Parker Ranch. 
Hewitt, Kawamoto, Holt, 
and Richards stated that Parker Ranch (1) cleaned and maintained the Property; (2) controlled access by posting no trespassing 
signs, maintaining fences, walls, gates and chains, and 
excluding trespassers from the Property; (3) did not allow 
anyone to enter or remain on the Property without Parker Ranch’s 
consent; and (4) used it continuously for ranching operations 
since 1961, such as pasturage, breeding, and running cattle.
8 
They also stated that members of the community, including 
neighboring property owners, acknowledged and recognized that 
Parker Ranch owned and operated the Property until it was sold 
to KLL in 2004. 
Kawamoto also stated that he had been personally involved with 
and supervised fence building, cattle operations, and various other ranching 
activities on the Property. 
10
 8   
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 Finally, Metzler stated that since KLL purchased the 
Property in 2004, together with other surrounding properties, 
KLL continued the ranching operations conducted by the 
Property’s previous owner, Parker Ranch. Metzler stated that, 
similar to Parker Ranch, KLL had controlled access to the Property and that members of the community, including 
neighboring property owners, acknowledge and recognize that KLL 
owns the Property. 
As an alternative to its adverse possession claim, KLL 
argued that, if the circuit court found that the Property had 
not been sold before David died, then KLL and Defendants were 
cotenants with each having paper title to 1/2 of the Property. 
b. Defendants’ Arguments 
Defendants filed a memorandum in opposition to KLL’s motion 
for default and/or summary judgment, denying that David sold the Property.  First, Defendants noted that no mention was made of 
the person to whom the Property was purportedly sold, and asserted that no other evidence of the alleged conveyance 
existed. Defendants contended that the probate statements 
regarding a sale were made in error as evidenced by the 
conveyances by three of David’s four heirs in 1906, 1907 , and 
1908, while probate was still pending (probate closed in 1917). 
Defendants argued, therefore, that the Property descended to 
David’s heirs, Kenoiaina, Miliama, Pahukula, and Pua, through 
11
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 intestacy. Defendants maintained that KLL and Defendants 
therefore obtained title from David’s heirs and were thus 
cotenants. 
Second, Defendants argued that KLL’s predecessor was 
plainly on notice of the cotenancy because (1) the 1961 deed 
from Joseph Iseke to Richard Smart purported to convey only a 
1/3 interest in the Property, and (2) multiple deeds recorded in 
the Registrar of Conveyances in 1908 (from Kenoiaina and Pua) 
and 1909 (from H.L. Holstein) show that David’s other heirs 
conveyed the Property to McDougall.  Defendants further argued that KLL failed to prove that it acted in good faith to the 
cotenants during the purported period of adverse possession. 
Finally, Defendants asserted that whether any parties 
inherited the Property from David based on the probate records 
was an issue of fact required to be resolved at trial; 
therefore, KLL’s motion should be denied . 
c. KLL’s Reply 
KLL argued in reply that Defendants failed to set forth 
specific facts as to whether David had title to the Property 
when he died in order to demonstrate a genuine issue of material 
fact for trial. KLL argued that it presented undisputed 
evidence that conclusively proved that David sold the Property.  
KLL asserted that neither KLL nor Defendants had title to the 
Property because title was vested in someone else when David 
12
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
                     
   died. KLL therefore argued that no cotenancy existed and that, 
therefore, the requirement of good faith notice to cotenants was 
inapplicable to KLL’s claim o f title by adverse possession. 
2. The Circuit Court Ruling 
On December 21, 2009, the circuit court held a hearing on 
KLL’s motion for default and/or summary judgment.9 KLL argued 
that there was direct testimony from the administrator of 
David’s estate, and the entire probate record itself was devoid 
of any reference to the Property; therefore, cotenancy was not 
an issue because David had transferred his interest in the 
Property before he died.  KLL asserted that the only issue was 
whether it had met its burden for adverse possession. 
Defendants countered that the deed from the alleged 
transaction never surfaced, nor was the person who took that 
conveyance ever identified. 
The circuit court then asked Defendants what other evidence 
would be presented to the court at trial, and stated: 
If there’s  no genuine material issue of fact, these are the 
facts, there’s not more facts and there’s not live 
witnesses where the Court is placed in a position of 
evaluating credibility, it is just –  these are the facts 
and we disagree as to what the legal results should be or are there facts that the Court needs to weigh?  
9 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided. 
13
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
   Defendants responded that they were not aware of any additional 
facts, but they would have the opportunity to further 
investigate if the case were to proceed to trial. 
On February 4, 2010, the circuit court filed an order 
granting KLL’s motion for default and/or summary judgment, 
concluding that (1) there were no genuine issues of material 
fact with respect to title to the Property, and (2) KLL was 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law to 100% of the Property 
by adverse possession free of all claims and encumbrances. 
On March 24, 2010, the circuit court entered its final 
judgment, which Defendants appealed to the ICA. 
C. ICA Appeal 
1. Defendants’ Opening Bri ef 
In their Opening Brief, Defendants argued that the 
circuit court erred as a matter of law in granting summary 
judgment in KLL’s favor as to exclusive ownership of the 
Property.  Defendants contended that the only conclusion 
supported by KLL’s evidence is that it holds paper title jointly 
with Defendants. Defendants further argued that KLL cannot set up title in an unknown stranger to defeat the cotenancy between 
itself and Defendants in order to avoid its burden of notice to 
cotenants. Defendants asserted that, at most, the circuit court 
could have found that there were competing claims to paper title 
to defeat summary judgment to the extent that KLL presented 
14
    
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 In reply, Defendants maintained  that KLL’s adverse 
possession claim attempts to set up title in a stranger to 
defeat Defendants’ claim, and cannot stand without the court 
first determining that someone else held title to the Property 
before David died. Defendants argued that the circuit court, in  sufficient evidence to raise a 
genuine issue of material fact 
that David sold the Property before he died, or alternatively, 
that KLL holds title jointly with Defendants. 
2. KLL’s Answering Brief 
KLL argued that the circuit court correctly granted summary 
judgment in its favor because Defendants could not support their claim of paper title to the Property and failed to raise a 
genuine issue of material fact. KLL contended that it provided 
sufficient evidence in the form of David’s probate records to 
show that David was not vested with title to the Property at the time of his death. KLL argued that because it derives title by 
adverse possession and established that David was not vested 
with title when he died, it could not be cotenants with 
Defendants. 
KLL further argued that the circuit court correctly ruled 
that it had established title to 100% of the Property by adverse 
possession where it established all the necessary elements of title by adverse possession. 
3. Defendants’ Reply Brief 
15
   
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
    ruling that KLL had title to 100% of the Property by adverse 
possession, erroneously ruled by implication that an unknown 
stranger held paper title to the Property against whom KLL was 
adversely possessing. 
4. The ICA Memorandum Opinion 
The ICA ruled that, according to the record, David’s heirs 
received no interest in the Property through the probate 
proceeding. Kaʻupulehu Land LLC v. Heirs and Assigns of 
Pahukula, No. 30475, at 2-3 (App. Dec. 11, 2013) (mem.). The 
ICA cited the following in support: (1) the February 6, 1905 
Inventory stating that David owned no real estate at death and 
containing an averment by the estate’s administrator confirming that to his knowledge, the Property had been sol d during David’s 
lifetime; (2) the February 2, 1906 clerk’s minutes regarding Sam 
Keanu’s “appearance as a claimant to real estate which he claims 
[David] owned and sold. ”; and (3) the August 22, 1906 power of 
attorney executed by David’s heirs acknowledging a clerk’s accounting of the probate expenses and residue of the estate as 
accurate. Kaʻupulehu, mem. op. at 3. The ICA also noted, 
however, that there was no record of David’s “purported pre -
death conveyance of the 
Property[.]” Id.  
The ICA concluded that Defendants “provided evidence 
showing interests in the Property through a chain of paper title  
that is not perfect. But in the case at hand, the break in the 
16

   
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 chain of record title carries an added significance: the break 
places the existence of a cotenancy between [KLL] and the 
Defendants in dispute.” Kaʻupulehu, mem. op. at 6-7. 
The ICA stated: “If there were no gaps in the chain of 
record title, the parties would be cotenants because the paper 
interests of all parties originate with the series of 
conveyances made by David’s heirs.” Kaʻupulehu
, mem. op. at 7. 
The ICA reasoned that the break in record title occurred between 
David and his heirs because “David’s probate records suggest the 
Property was sold before he died, and that no interest in the Property was distributed to David’s heirs through probate.” 
Id.   
The ICA concluded, however, that “there is no recorded conveyance by David to any third party, and three of David’s 
four heirs conveyed an interest in the Property after David’s 
death and before probate close d.” Id.  The ICA thus concluded: 
“The issue then is where there is a shared break in the parties’ chains of record title, does [KLL] prevail on summary judgment 
by claiming superior title to the Defendants through adverse 
possession?” Id. 
The ICA explained that where a cotenancy exists, there is a 
requirement of good faith between cotenants that requires the 
tenant claiming adversely to actually notify the cotenants of 
his or her claim against them, and that a “finding of bad faith may be inferred from evidence that the cotenant in possession 
17

   
 
 should have known that a cotenancy existed.” Kaʻupulehu,  mem. 
op. at 8 (citing Wailuku Agribusiness Co. v. Ah Sam , 114 Hawai ʻi 
24, 34, 155 P.3d 1125, 1135 (2007), as amended  (Apr. 12, 2007)).  
The ICA further stated, “Breaks in chains of record title 
provide reason to suspect the existence of one or more 
cotenancies.” Id.  (citing Petra v. Allencastre, 91 Hawaiʻ i 545, 
985 P.2d 1112 (App. 1999)).  
The ICA held that in concluding that a cotenan
cy did not 
exist, the circuit court erroneously resolved the disputed issue 
of material fact, the existence of a cotenancy, in favor of KLL. 
The ICA concluded: 
[T]he lack of a recording from David’s purported pre -death 
conveyance, together with the recorded conveyances of 
interests in the Property by David’s heirs, are genuine 
issues of material fact regarding the existence of a 
cotenancy. The existence of a cotenancy is a material fact 
that [KLL] must overcome to satisfy its proof of title 
through adverse possession. 
Id.   The ICA further  concluded that the conveyances to Sam Keanu 
and H.L. Holstein were particularly notable from an evidentiary 
standpoint because (1) Sam testified during  David’s probate 
proceedings that the Property had been sold  , and (2) H.L.  
Holstein, the heirs’ probate attorney of record,  received an 
interest in the Property  from one of David’s heirs. Thus, 
“[w]hile Keanu and Holstein had knowledge of the probate proceedings that did not distribute any interest in the Property  
to David’s heirs, both took interests in the Property from  
18

     
  
 
 David’s heirs and subsequently conveyed those interests.” 
Kaʻupulehu
, mem. op. at 9. The ICA concluded that “[a]ny 
inferences from this evidence must favor the Defendants, the 
non-moving party.” Id.  
The ICA then cited to its decision in 
Makila Land Co. v. 
Kapu
, 114 Hawaiʻ i 56, 156 P.3d 482 (App. 2006), which states the 
following regarding genuine issues of material fact arising from 
conflicting interpretations of undisputed facts, as in the 
instant case, that preclude summary judgment: 
A judge ruling on a motion for summary judgment cannot 
summarily try the facts; his role is limited to applying the law to the facts that have been established by the 
litigants’ papers. Therefore, a party moving for summary 
judgment is not entitled to a judgment merely because the 
facts he offers appear more plausible than those tendered 
in opposition or because it appears that the adversary is 
unlikely to prevail at trial. . . . Therefore, if the 
evidence presented on the motion is subject to conflicting interpretations, or reasonable men might differ as to its 
significance, summary judgment is improper.  
Id. (citing 114 Hawai  ʻi at 67-68, 156 P.3d at 493 (citing Kajiya 
v. Dep’t  of Water Supply , 2 Haw. App. 221, 224, 629 P.2d 635, 
638–39 (App. 1981))).  The ICA held that it could not conclude 
that KLL “has a right to judgment with such clarity as to leave  
no room for controversy, nor ha[d] [KLL  ] established  
affirmatively that Defendants cannot prevail under any 
circumstances.”   Id.   The ICA therefore  vacated the circuit 
court’s final judgment granting KLL’s  motion for default and/or 
summary judgment, and remanded the case to the circuit court.  
Kaʻupulehu,  mem. op. at 9-10.  
19

   
  
 A motion for summary judgment is reviewed de novo, 
under the same standard applied by the trial court.  
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party  is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.  
A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting an essential element of 
a cause of action asserted by one of the parties.  
 On a motion for summary judgment, the court must view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non -moving 
party. The court is permitted to draw only those inferences of which the evidence is reasonably susceptible and it may 
not resort to speculation.  
 The burden lies upon the moving party  to show that no 
genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to the 
essential elements of the claim and that, based on the 
undisputed facts, he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Only once the moving party has satisfied its initial 
burden of production does the burden shift to the non -
moving party to show specific facts that present a genuine issue for trial.  
 When a summary judgment motion is filed before the 
discovery deadline, a [Hawai‘i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP)] Rule 56(f) continuance provides the means by which  
a non-moving party can assure that she has had adequate 
time to conduct discovery before the motion is decided. 
 
  
  
  
 This case turns on whether David was vested with title to 
the subject property  when he died.  If he was, then KLL and 
Defendants are cotenants, and as explained below, KLL would not 
be able to meet legal requirements to establish adverse III. Standard of Review 
This court has stated: 
Winfrey v. GGP Ala Moana LLC , 130 Hawai ‘i 262, 270- 71, 308 P.3d 
891, 899-900 (2013)  (internal citations, brackets, and quotation 
marks omitted). 
IV.	 Discussion 
A.
	 Title to the Subject Property Vested in David’s Heirs 
Upon His Death 
20
   
 
 In this regard, the parties dispute whether David sold the 
Property prior to his death and the sufficiency of KLL’s 
evidence to prove the sale. KLL argues that it is entitled to 
100% of the Property by adverse possession because David was not 
vested with title to the Property at death and thus, the parties 
are not cotenants. KLL asserts that it “provided ample, 
uncontroverted evidence from David’s probate proceedings establishing that he had sold . . . the Property prior to his  
death.”   For example, the order of distribution of David’s 
estate admitted into evidence contains no mention of the 
Property.  KLL therefore argues that the ICA gravely erred and 
was obviously inconsistent in finding genuine issues of material 
fact regarding the existence of a cotenancy, and  asserts that  
the ICA’s conclusion that David’s heirs received no interest in 
the Property through the probate  proceeding disposes of 
Defendants’ claims.  
   possession with respect to its cotenants. If he was not 
vested 
with title, then KLL and Defendants are not cotenants, and the circuit court properly concluded that KLL is entitled to a 100% 
interest in the Property based on adverse possession. 
Defendants contend that the omission of the Property in the 
probate distribution is not a conclusive or binding 
determination of David’s non-ownership of the Property; thus, 
21
   
 
                     
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 The record is devoid of evidence of a deed from David’s alleged pre -
death sale of the Property. Therefore, if David had sold the Property, the 
buyer’s failure to record the deed would have rendered it void as against 
subsequent purchasers without actual notice of the purported sale, i.e., at 
 title to the Property cannot fail to pass to David’s heirs by 
virtue of a probate order.10 
10 As a preliminary matter, although not argued by the parties, we 
note the effect of two legal precepts relevant to the issues.  First, the 
statute of frauds in effect at the time provided, in relevant part: 
No action shall be brought and maintained in any of the following cases: 
. . . . 
Fourthly: Upon any contract for the sale of lands, 
tenements or hereditaments, or of any interest in or 
concerning them; 
. . . . 
Unless the promise, contract or agreement, upon which 
such actions shall be brought, or some memorandum or note 
thereof, shall be in writing, and be signed by the party to 
be charged therewith, or by some person thereunto by him 
lawfully authorized. 
RLH § 1314 (1898); RLH § 1996 (1905) (recodification). 
Defendants raised the statute of frauds in their Answer, but did not 
provide any further argument . As this affirmative defense was pled, it was 
not waived. Lee v. Kimura, 2 Haw. App. 538, 545, 634 P.2d 1043, 1048 (1981) 
(“ 
The defense of the statute [of frauds] . . . may undoubtedly be waived by 
the defendant, and unless he sets up the statute and relies on it by some 
proper pleading, he thereby impliedly waives the objection that the contract 
was not in writing.” (internal quotation marks and citations omitted)). See 
also HRCP Rule 8(c) (2000) 
(affirmative defenses).  Because we rule in 
Defendants’ favor on other grounds, we do not rely on the statute of frauds. We note, however, that the alleged conveyance from David would be void and 
unenforceable under the statute of frauds as no written memorandum signed by 
David evincing the alleged sale of the Property has been produced. 
Second, pursuant to RLH § 2380 (1905), 
All deeds . . . or other conveyances of real estate within 
this Territory, shall be recorded in the office of the 
registrar of conveyances, and every such conveyance not so 
recorded shall be void as against any subsequent purchaser, 
in good faith and for a valuable consideration, not having 
actual notice of such conveyance, of the same real estate, 
or any portion thereof, whose conveyance shall be first duly recorded. 
(continued. . . ) 
22
   
 
 
 First, the administrator’s statement was based on “his 
knowledge and belief[,]” and provides no informati on to support 
the statement. Second, Sam Keanu purchased an interest in the  
Property from his mother Miliama for $50 in exchange for “all of 
[Miliama’s] interest in [David’s] estate . . . , being all the 
real and personal property  at Kohala[.]” Both of these 
statements are being “offered in evidence to prove the truth of 
the matter asserted[ ,]” i.e., that David sold the Property, and 
thus constitute hearsay.  Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence  (HRE) Rule 
801 (1993). Nonetheless, the statements may be admissible as a  
hearsay exception under either HRE Rule 803(b)  (15) (1993), which  
                                                                  
 The only direct evidence in support of KLL’s allegation is 
the administrator’s testimony under oath in the February 14, 1905 Inventory “[t]hat a certain kuleana #8723 in the name of 
Kahoiwai situate at Pulehu near Mahukona and which belonged to deceased had upon information been sold during lifetime of said 
Kahoiwai[,]” and a February 2, 1906 entry in the clerk’s minutes 
that reads: “Sam Keanu makes an appearanc e as a claimant to 
real estate which he claims Kahoiwai owned and sold.” Neither 
of these, however, conclusively establishes a sale as KLL 
contends. 
( . . .continued)
  
minimum, McDougall and Joseph Iseke, subsequent purchasers not involved in 
the probate proceeding.  Again, Defendants do not rely on this theory, and we 
decide this case in their favor on other grounds.
 
23
   
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
                     
  
 
  
  provides for the admissibility of “[s]tatements in documents 
affecting an interest in property,” or Rule 803(b)(16), which 
provides for the admissibility of “[s]tatements in a document   in 
existence twenty years or more the authenticity of which is established.” The admission of these statements, however, is 
not determinative. 
As noted by the ICA, there were multiple conveyances of the 
Property during the probate proceeding by individuals who would have known if David had not been vested with title.  Three of 
David’s heirs conveyed interests in the Property during 
probate.
11 Notably, the record also reflects that Sam Keanu and 
H.L. Holstein, the heirs’ attorney of record, accepted 
conveyances of the Property12 that were inconsistent with the 
statements made in the probate proceedings by the administrator 
and Sam Keanu himself. 
In addition to relying on these hearsay statements, KLL 
notes that the probate record is devoid of any reference to the Property being part of David’s estate. Multiple documents, 
including the February 14, 1905 Inventory and the September 13, 1905 Final Accounts, state that the only asset remaining in 
11 As discussed supra, there is no record of conveyance of the 
disputed Property by David’s brother Pahukula, who was listed as an heir at 
David’s probate proceedings . 
12 Pua was a minor at the time of David’s probate proceedings in 
1905. Although the record does not state how old she was, H.L. Holstein, her 
attorney on record, received an interest from Pua in 1908. 
24
     
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Second, the statute in effect in 1905 authorizing orders 
for the filing of inventories of the assets of a decedent’s 
estate by an administrator did not require real  property to be  
inventoried. In re Lopez’  Estate, 19 Haw. 620, 623 (1909)  (“The 
statute . . . authorizing or ders ‘for the filing of inventories 
of the assets’  by the administrator does not require real estate 
to be inventoried and probably refers to . . .  ‘all the goods, David’s estate was 10 shares of ʻEwa Plantation stock.  
Furthermore, the power of attorney signed by all four heirs, the August 30, 1917 master audit report, and the August 30, 1917 probate court order accepting the report, all confirm that the 
Property was not part of David’s probate estate subject to 
distribution. KLL argues that Defendants had an opportunity to dispute the Inventory and accounting, but did not do so. 
For the following reasons, the omission of the Property in 
the probate Inventory does not govern whether the Property was 
part of David’s estate. 
First, the Inventory is merely “
prima facie evidence of the 
property that has come to the possession, or under the control of the [administrator].” 
In re Gill’s Estate , 2 Haw. 681, 688 
(King. 1863) (Explaining that sworn inventories “are supposed to contain a full and true exhibit of the entire assets of the 
testator, whether they may have actually come to the possession 
of the executor or not[.] ”). 
25

   
 
 Third, and most importantly, we note that under the law in 
effect in 1903, “[t]itle to real estate vest[ed] at once on the 
death of the owner in his heirs or devisees, and without an 
order of court.”  In re Kaiena’s Estate , 24 Haw. 148, 148 (Terr. 
1917); cf. id.    (quoting 2 Schouler on Wills (5th ed.), § 1212) 
(“Real estate, at the common law, becomes vested at once on the death of the owner in his heirs, or devisees, and the executor 
or administrator has as such no inherent power over it.”). See 
also In re Kekuewa , 37 Haw. 394, 397 (Terr. 1946) (stating that 
real property  “ordinarily constitutes no part of the assets of 
administration”); Pahuilima v. Kela, 6 Haw. 573, 574 (King. 
1885) (demonstrating that heirs at law succeed to possession of 
real property); Keahi v. Bishop , 3 Haw. 546 (King. 1874) 
(holding that where a probate court determines that a certain relationship exists without reference to title to real estate, a related party is entitled to use that decision for the purpose 
of getting possession of and defending himself in possession of  
real estate he or she inherits by such relationship); Rodrigues 
v. Char Fook, 29 Haw. 284, 286-87 (Terr. 1926) (holding that 
real estate of a decedent passes immediately upon death to the 
heirs or devisees, subject to any proceedings to satisfy the 
decedent’s debts).  chattels and credits of the deceased coming to his possession. ’” 
(citing RLH § 1850 (1905))). 
26
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                     
   
  
  
 Thus, if there was no valid conveyance of the Property 
before David’s death and if he had been vested with title when 
he died, his interest in the Property passed outside of probate 
as a matter of law to David’s heirs at law, which the probate 
court determined to be Kenoiaina, Miliama, Pahukula, and Pua.13 
B.	 The Lost Deed Doctrine Precludes a Finding That David 
Conveyed the Property Before His Death 
Defendants argued before the ICA that in order for KLL to 
claim title to 100% of the Property by adverse possession, KLL 
must prove the lost deed from David’s alleged sale of the 
Property.14 Defendants argued that pursuant to Kapuniai v. 
Kekupu
, 3 Haw. 560 (King. 1874), when an unrecorded lost deed is 
set up as the basis of title, a movant must allege sufficient facts to show clear proof of the execution of the deed and proof 
of its contents to enable the court to determine the character 
of the instrument. (citing 3 Haw. at 561).  This is known as 
the “lost deed” theory or doctrine. Defendants further argued 
that in asserting a lost deed theory, factors required to 
13 Defendants contend that HRS § 560:3 -1008 (2006) and Rule 86 of 
the Hawai‘ i Probate Rules, which permit the probate court to address newly 
discovered assets, “support the contention that property inadvertently left 
out of probate by mistake or inadvertence once discovered must be 
distributed.” As the Property would have passed outside of probate for purposes of administration pursuant to the law in effect at the time of 
David’s death, the modern view of real property in probate is not pertinent. 
As noted in note 10, supra, Defendants did not specifically rely 
on the statute of frauds. 
27
 14   
 In response, KLL asserted that Defendants misapprehend and 
misapply the lost deed doctrine.  KLL argued that its source of 
title is by adverse possession, not the lost deed, thus the lost
deed theory does not apply as a matter of law.  
  
 
   
 
 support a movant’s presumption for a lost conveyance include  the 
following:  
[T]he length of time the land has been in the movant’s 
possession, the completeness of the chain of conveyances of 
the land during the period under which the movant claimed, 
references in other earlier deeds tending to indicate that 
the title was out of the answering party’s predecessor, and 
other facts tending to show the exclusive possession under 
claim of ownership on the part of the movant’s 
predecessors.  
(citing Brown v. Speckles , 18 Haw. 91, 93 (Terr. 1906)). 
 
In 
Kapuniai
, the defendant in an ejectment action in 
possession of a disputed property asserted that Kapuniai, the 
last known owner, had given her late husband an unrecorded deed 
that had been lost. The territorial court of Hawai‘ i stated that 
to prove the lost deed, 
The law is undoubted that it will be necessary that there 
should be presented clear proof of the execution of the 
deed, and proof of its contents sufficient to enable the 
Court to determine the character of the instrument. This 
principle is so clear as not to need the citation of any authority. 
 
3 Haw. at 561. 
Subsequently, in Brown
, the Supreme Court of the Territory 
of Hawai‘ i considered whether evidence adduced by defendants in 
support of their assertion of title by adverse possession was 
28
   
 sufficient to presume a lost grant to defendants’ predecessors. 
The territorial court stated:  
When for a long period a plaintiff in ejectment and his 
predecessors have made no claim of title and the defendants 
and their predecessors have been in possession under claim of title, the court may, according to the circumstances, 
instruct the jury that they may or should presume a deed to 
the defendants ’  predecessor in order to quiet their 
possession and solve the difficulties, and in so doing the jury may consider what may have occurred as well as what 
may fairly be supposed to have actually occurred.  
18 Haw. at 91. Although the lower court had instructed the jury 
on the presumption of a lost deed as requested, the defendants 
contended on certiorari that “the evidence was such that as a 
matter of law the court should have directed a verdict” in their  
favor.  18 Haw. at 107. The territorial court determined that 
“the evidence was such as to permit, if not require, the jury to 
find against the theory of a lost grant ” because  the purported 
period of adverse possession involved was only 38 years and the 
presumption was not based on a lost deed, but on a proved deed 
between defendants’ predecessors that omitted part of the  
disputed land. Id.  
In this case, 
KLL’s assertion of a 100% interest in the 
Property based on adverse possession is completely dependent on the existence of a pre-death conveyance by David; KLL otherwise 
concedes that it is a cotenant with Defendants and that it 
cannot meet adverse possession requirements against Defendants 
as cotenants. We therefore reject KLL’s assertion that it is 
not claiming adverse possession under the purportedly lost deed.  
29
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  In light of the fact that (1) there was no record of a 
conveyance by David to anyone before he died; (2) the existence  
of the purportedly “lost deed” has not been proven ; (3) the   
purported grantee of the  Property never attempted to assert  
his/her rights to the Property; (4) real   property was not  
required to be included in an inventory of a decedent’s estate ;   
(5) under the law in effect at the time, “[t]itle to real estate In other words, in 
arguing that the lost deed theory does not 
apply, KLL contends that it is not claiming an interest in the 
Property through the chain of paper title; however, KLL’s 
adverse possession claim depends upon the purported existence of an unrecorded lost deed to an unidentified stranger. Thus, in 
order for KLL to claim title to 100% of the Property by adverse 
possession, it must establish the existence of the lost deed 
under the doctrine. 
KLL has not put forth any evidence of the execution of the 
allegedly lost deed or its contents to enable this court to 
determine its character. In particular, no evidence has been 
adduced that indicates the grantee, the date of sale, or the 
consideration provided for the Property. The evidence is 
therefore insufficient, as a matter of law, to establish the 
lost deed under the doctrine, and KLL has failed to satisfy its 
burden to prove the existence of the purportedly lost deed. 
C. KLL and Defendants are Cotenants 
30
    
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 vest[ed] at once on the death of the owner in his heirs or 
devisees, and without an order of court[;] ” and (6) three of 
David’s heirs conveyed interests in the Property after David’s 
death but during the probate proceedings while acknowledging 
that there was no real property in David’s estate subject to 
distribution through probate, the evidence presented is not sufficient to establish that David was not vested with title to 
the Property when he died.  In re Kaiena’s Estate , 24 Haw. at 
148.  We therefore hold that title  to the Property  descended to 
David’s heirs as a matter of law.  
As the evidence put forth by KLL failed to establish the 
alleged break in the chain of record title, the ICA erred in 
concluding that the issue in the instant case was whether KLL 
could prevail on summary judgment by claiming superior title to 
Defendants through adverse possession when there is a shared 
break in the parties’ chains of record title. Kaʻupulehu, mem. 
op. at 7. 
KLL and Defendants each received their respective interests 
through the same chain of title. KLL’s interest stems from a 
series of conveyances starting with a conveyance by David’s 
sister Miliama. While Miliama only had a 1/4 interest to 
convey, KLL purportedly received an interest to 100% of the 
Property from Richard Smart, who himself had received only a 1/3 
interest in the Property in 1961 from Joseph Iseke; thus the 
31
   Despite having actual knowledge that he received only a 
fractional undivided interest in the Property, Richard Smart 
purported to convey a 100% interest in the Property  to his 
Revocable Personal Trust in 1988.  This purported conveyance occurred despite the existence of recorded deeds conveying (1) 
Kenoiaina’s interest in the Property to McDougall in 1907,   (2) 
Pua’s interest in the  Property to H.L. Holstein in 1908, and (3)  
H.L. Holstein’s interest in the Property   to McDougall in 1909.  
“Where one tenant in common makes a deed to the whole of the 
common property the deed conveys only his own interest and doe  s 
not convey the interests of his cotenants[.]” 
Scott v. Pilipo,  
24 Haw. 277, 282-83 (Terr. 1918). Moreover, “if real estate is 
held in common, and one tenant assumes to convey the entire land 
. . . , his deed will furnish color of title.” Kalamakee v. 
Wharton, 16 Haw. 228, 234 (Terr. 1904).  Applying and extending 
these legal precedents, Richard Smart’s deed to his Revocable 
Personal Trust furnished mere color of title to the entire basis of Iseke’s 1/3 conveyance rather than 1/4 conveyance is 
unclear. 
32

    
 
 Defendants, on the other hand, claim their interest in  the 
Property through McDougall, whose interest stems from 
conveyances by Kenoiaina and Pua in 1907 and 1908. 
There is no 
evidence in the record that McDougall asserted any rights to the 
                     
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 Interpreting the description of the Property in the deed, the TMK and 
LCA numbers provide conflicting descriptions that demonstrate a latent 
ambiguity. Under established rules of construction, “the construction put 
upon a deed by the parties, as shown by their possession, is entitled to 
consideration in a case of latent ambiguity or of conflict between two 
descriptions and [] a deed should be construed most favorably to the 
grantee.” Ahmi v. Waller, 15 Haw. 497, 499 (Terr. 1904).  Stated 
differently, “if an ambiguity exists, the situation of the parties to the 
deed should be considered in determining their intention, and the intent so 
determined should be given effect if practicable.” State v. Hawaiian 
Dredging Co., 48 Haw. 152, 178, 397 P.2d 593, 608 (1964) .   See also Lovejoy  
v. Lovett, 124 Mass. 270, 270 (Mass. 1878)  (cited in 15 Haw. at 499) (“ Parol 
evidence of the practical construction given to a deed by the subsequent acts 
of the parties thereto is admissible, when the language thereof, in the 
description of the land conveyed, is doubtful”).  
 Based on record evidence of a survey map and the above- mentioned deeds, 
LCA number 8098 refers to a parcel adjacent to the subject property that 
Richard Smart also owned. Following established rules of construction, if 
the TMK used to convey the Property is correct, the description taken as a whole shows an intent to convey the subject property  , such that the deeds 
would be construed as valid . 
 Property as opposed to the paper title that KLL claims. Thus, 
KLL received paper title to a 1/4 interest in the Property
.15 
15 We note that the deeds conveying the Property from the Richard 
Smart Revocable Personal Trust to the Parker Land Trust, and then to KLL, 
describe the Property under an incorrect Land Commission Award (LCA) number 
(LCA 8098 as opposed to LCA 8723) and also by Tax Map Key (TMK) number. 
“It is a well settled rule that descriptions of land in a deed must be 
reasonably certain, either by express language contained therein or by 
reference therein to some other deed or instrument or existing conditions 
capable of ascertainment.” Hayselden v. Lincoln, 24 Haw. 169, 172 (Terr. 
1917). In addition, 
“where a contradiction occurs in the description of land 
conveyed by grant, the false or mistaken part of the description may be rejected and effect given to the grant if the other parts of the description 
identify the land and do not conflict with the manifest intent of the 
parties.” Mist v. Kawelo , 11 Haw. 587, 590 (Rep. 1898) ( “[I]f there be a 
description of the property clear and definite and sufficient to render certain what is to be demised, the addition of a wrong name or of an erroneous statement as to quantity, occupancy, locality or an erroneous 
enumeration of particulars, will have no effect.”). 
33
   The issues in this case are purely issues of law, which we 
resolve as follows: (1) we hold as a matter of law that title 
to the subject property  descended in accordance with the law in 
effect at the time of David’s death in 1903 to David’s heirs; (2) we further hold that Defendants and KLL are cotenants, 
having received undivided fractional interests through mesne 
conveyances stemming from David as a common grantor.   
Accordingly, the ICA erred in finding that there was a genuine 
issue of material fact with respect to the existence of a 
cotenancy.  
 
 
 “In an action to quiet title, the burden is on the 
plaintiff to prove title in and to the land in dispute, and, 
                     
  
 Property. Moreover, McDougall died intestate  in 1935 and the  
Property did  not appear in the “Inventory of the First and Final 
Account of the Estate of McDougall,” nor does it appear that McDougall conveyed his interest in the Property.  Therefore, if 
the Property  was in McDougall’s estate when he died, Defendants 
have paper title to half of  the Property  as descendants of 
16 McDougall.  
D.	 KLL’s Adver se Possession Claim Fails Against Its 
Cotenants 
16 As of 1935, the time of McDougall’s death, real property still 
vested on the death of the owner in his heirs or devisees, without a court 
order. According to In  re Kekuewa , even as of 1946, real property 
“ordinarily constitutes no part of the assets of [a probate] administration.” 
37 Haw. at 397. 
34
   KLL seeks to quiet title on the Property  on the basis of 
adverse possession. Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS)  § 669-1(b) 
(1993) states in relevant part:   
 
 
  
  
 
 “Between 1898 and 1973, the statutory period for 
establishing title to real property by adverse possession was  
ten years.”   Wailuku Agribusiness , 114 Hawai‘ i at 3  3 n.19, 155 absent such proof, it is unnecessary for the defendant to make 
any showing.” Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto , 76 Hawai ʻi  
402, 407, 879 P.2d 507, 512 (1994) (citing State v. Zimring , 58 
Haw. 106, 110, 566 P.2d 725, 729 (1977)). 
“The plaintiff has 
the burden to prove either that he has paper title to the 
property or that he holds title by adverse possession.” 76 
Hawaiʻi  at 408, 879 P.2d at 513 (citations omitted).  “While it 
is not necessary for the plaintiff to have perfect title to 
establish a prima facie case, he must at least prove that he has 
a substantial interest in the property  and that his title is 
superior to that of the defendants.” Id.  
Action for the purpose of establishing title to a parcel of 
real property of greater than five acres may be brought by 
any person who had been in adverse possession of the real 
property for not less than twenty years prior to November 
7, 1978, or for not less than earlier applicable time periods of adverse possession. For purposes of this 
section, any person claiming title by adverse possession 
shall show that such person acted in good faith. Good 
faith means that, under all the facts and circumstances, a 
reasonable person would believe that the person has an interest in title to the lands in question and such belief 
is based on inheritance, a written instrument of 
conveyance, or the judgment of a court of competent 
jurisdiction. 
35

   “In order to establish title to real property by adverse  
possession, a claimant must bear the burden of proving by clear 
and positive proof each element of actual, open,  notorious, 
hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the statutory 
period.” Wailuku Agribusiness , 114 Hawai ‘i at 33,  155 P.3d at 
1134 (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets 
omitted). KLL asserts that it “provided uncontroverted evidence 
that it has been in actual, open, notorious, continuous,  
                     
  
   
 P.3d 1125, 1134 n.19  (citations omitted).  KLL received its 
interest in the Property in 2004. This court has held, “ [W]here 
there is such a privity of estate or title as that the several possessions can be referred to the original entry, they may be 
joined and are regarded as a continuous possession[.]” 
Kainea 
v. Kreuger, 31 Haw. 108, 108 (Terr. 1929).   Title to Miliama’s 
interest in the Property  descends straight and unbroken to KLL 
from the Joseph Iseke to Richard Smart conveyance in 1961.   
Thus, to establish adverse possession, KLL must prove that its predecessors in interest met the elements of adverse possession 
for either a ten year period between 1961 to 1973 or for a 
17 twenty year period prior to 1978.    
17 We note that in 1978, the period of adverse possession was 
extended from ten to twenty years and additional restrictions were placed on 
claims to five acres or more. See Haw. Const. art. XVI, § 12; HRS § 657 -31.5 
(1993). 
36
    
  
 
   
    
 
 
   exclusive, and hostile use and possession of the Property and 
has paid the property taxes thereon since 1961. ” 
“Actual, open, and notorious possession is established 
where a claimant shows use of the land to such an extent and in 
such a manner as to put the world on notice by means so 
notorious as to attract the attention of every adverse 
claimant.” Wailuku Agribusiness , 114 Hawai‘ i at 33, 155 P.3d at 
1134 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations 
omitted). “Continuity and exclusivity of possession require 
that the adverse possess or’s use of a disputed area . . . rise 
to that level which would characterize an average owner’s use of 
similar property.” 114 Hawai‘ i at 34, 155 P.3d at 1134-35 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  Based on the 
declarations from Hewitt, Kawamoto, Holt, Richards, and Metzler, 
KLL met its burden of proving that its predecessors had actual, 
open, notorious, continuous, and exclusive possession of the 
Property since 1961; however, KLL has not met its burden of 
proving “hostile possession.” 
This court has held , “where a cotenancy exists there is a 
special burden in proving hostile possession that requires the 
cotenants making a claim of adverse possession to show that they 
had acted in good faith in rel ation to their cotenants.” 
Wailuku Agribusiness , 114 Hawai‘ i at 34, 155 P.3d at 1135 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) . “In most 
37
   
 
 
 
 
 In this case, KLL’s predecessors, namely Richard Smart, had 
reason to suspect that  a cotenancy existed as of 1961.  The deed 
from Joseph Iseke to Richard Smart contains the first mention of 
“a 1/3 undivided interest.” It therefore appears that Joseph Iseke knew that he may have received only a fractional undivided 
18 interest from Sam.   Thus, Richard Smart could not, in good 
                     
  
 circumstances, this requirement of good faith will in turn 
mandate that the tenant claiming adversely must actually notify 
his cotenants that he is claiming against them.” City & Cnty.  
of Honolulu v. Bennett , 57 Haw. 195, 209, 552 P.2d 1380, 1390 
(1976). This court has held, however, that good faith is 
satisfied by less than actual notice in the following 
exceptional circumstances: 
where the tenant in possession has no reason to suspect 
that a cotenancy exists; or where the tenant in possession 
makes a good faith, reasonable effort to notify the 
cotenants but is unable to locate them; or where the 
tenants out of possession already have actual knowledge 
that the tenant in possession is claiming adversely to their interests. 
Id. This court further held, “[i] n these limited circumstances, 
the notice requirement will be satisfied by constructive notice 
and ‘open and notorious possession [.]’”  57 Haw. at 209-10, 552 
P.2d at 1390. 
18 It is unclear where the concept of a 1/3 interest originated as 
the four heirs would have each received a 1/4 undivided interest through 
intestate succession. Arguably, Joseph Iseke may have become aware that his interest in the P roperty was a fractional undivided interest after viewing 
the other recorded deeds. 
38
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  faith, provide the cotenants with less than actual notice, which 
KLL has admitted it is unable to prove.  See Wailuku  
Agribusiness, 114 Hawai ʻi at 34, 155 P.3d at 1135 (“ [A] finding 
of bad faith may be inferred from evidence that the cotenant in 
possession ought to  have known that there existed a cotenancy .”  
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted
)).  
In addition, the other “exceptional circumstances” are also 
inapplicable to this case.   
KLL’s alternative claim of paper title is therefore the 
only basis on which it can claim an interest in the Property. 
KLL has not shown that its title to the Property is superior to 
that of Defendants and has therefore failed to establish that it is entitled to judgment. 
Accordingly, the circuit court erred 
in granting summary judgment in KLL’s favor. 
E.	 The Case Must Be Remanded for a Determination of 
Pahukula’ s Interest 
Based on our holding that title descended to David’s heirs, 
David’s brother Pahukula received a 1/4 undivided interest in 
the Property.  Pahukula died intestate without conveying his 
interest in the Property, and without a probate proceeding over 
his estate or a judicial determination of his heirs. The only 
record evidence of Pahukula’s heirs is a deed conveying an 
unrelated Maui property to his son in 1910 . Pahukula’s heirs or 
successors in interest were named in KLL’s Complaint and 
39
    
 
 
 In this regard, we note two additional issues that may 
become relevant on remand.  First,  KLL asserts that, as owner of 
the surrounding lands, Pahukula’s interest escheat s to KLL.   
Under Hawai‘ i law  prior to 1977, the interest of an owner of a 
kuleana who died intestate or partially intestate without any 
takers escheated to the ahupua  ‘a or ili owner.  In re Kekuewa,  37  
Haw. at 395; HRS § 532  -15 (1968) (repealed 1987).  KLL’s 
assertion regarding Pahukula is without merit, as the record 
reflects that Pahukula had a son to whom he conveyed property on 
Maui. This pre-1977  law, however, could become relevant if 
Pahukula’s heirs died intestate without any takers and the law 
was still in effect  at that point in time.  
  
 
 
 publication summons, but did not appear in the case. We 
therefore remand this case to the circuit court with 
instructions for a determination of Pahukula’s interest in the 
Property. 
In 1977, this law was superseded by the Uniform Probate 
Code, which provided for escheat to the State. HRS § 2-105 
(1985) (“If there is no taker under the provisions of this 
Article, the intestate estate passes t o the State.”). In 1987, 
the provision was further amended to provide for escheat to the 
State of Hawai i, Department of Land and Natural Resources to 
hold in trust for the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA). 1987 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 307, § 1 at 961-62; HRS § 560:2-105.5 
40
    
 
 
 
 KLL argued before the circuit court that OHA does not have 
an interest in the Property  because its interest “would arise 
only if an owner of an inheritable interest in the Property died 
intestate or partially intestate and there were no takers of 
                     
   (2006).19 In this case, OHA was named as a defendant pursuant to 
HRS § 669-2(e) (1993), which provides in relevant part that in 
any action to quiet title under HRS § 669-1, OHA shall be joined 
as a defendant when:  
(1) The land claimed by the plaintiff is kuleana land; and 
(2) The plaintiff has reason to believe that an owner of an 
inheritable interest in the kuleana land died intestate or 
died partially intestate and there is or was no taker under 
article II of the Hawaii uniform probate code. 
For purposes of [subsection e], “kuleana land” means 
that land granted to native tenants pursuant to L 1850, p. 
202, entitle d “An Act Confirming Certain Resolutions of the 
King and Privy Council, Passed on the 21st Day of December, 
A.D. 1849, Granting to the Common People Allodial Titles 
for Their Own Lands and House Lots, and Certain Other 
Privileges”, as originally enacted an d as amended.  
19 HRS § 560:2 -105.5 provides: 
Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, if 
the owner of an inheritable interest in kuleana land dies intestate, or dies partially intestate and that partial 
intestacy includes the decedent’s interest in the kuleana 
land, and if there is no taker under article II, such 
inheritable interest shall pass to the department of land 
and natural resources to be held in trust until [OHA] 
develops a land management plan for the use and management 
of such kuleana properties, and such plan is approved by 
the department of land and natural resources.   Upon 
approval, the department of land and natural resources 
shall transfer such kuleana properties to [OHA].  For the 
purposes of this section, “kuleana lands” means those lands 
granted to native tenants pursuant to L. 1850, p. 202, 
entitled “An Act Confirming Certain Resolutions of the King 
and Privy Council Passed on the 21st Day of December, A.D. 
1849, Granting to the Common People Allodial Titles for Their Own Lands and House Lots, and Certain Other 
Privileges”, as originally enacted and as amended.  
41
       
  
  
  
 
  
                     
 20  In addition, we note that  in quieting title, there may be an 
issue as to whether Pahukula’s interest in the Property was advanced to him  
pursuant to RLH § 2116 (1898),  which provides as follows:  
 
 such inheritable interest[.]”  Therefore, on remand, the circuit 
court must determine whether there were any takers of Pahukula’s 
interest, and if none, whether escheat applies and to whom 
20 Pahukula’s  interest would escheat.
Accordingly, we 
remand this case to the circuit court for a 
determination of Pahukula’s interest in the Property. 
V. Conclusion 
Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’ s January 9, 2014 Judgment 
on Appeal and the circuit court’s March 25, 2010 Final Judgment, 
If any child of 
an intestate shall have been advanced by 
him by settlement or portion of real or personal estate, or 
of both of them, the value thereof shall be reckoned, for the purposes of this section only, as part of the real and 
personal estate of such intestate, descendible to his heirs 
and to be distributed to his next of kin according to law. 
And if such advancement be equal or superior to the amount 
or share which such child would be entitled to receive of the real and personal estate of the deceased as above 
reckoned, then such child and his descendants shall be 
excluded from any share in the real and personal estate of 
the intestate . 
Due to the fact that (1) Pahukula’s recorded conveyance to his son conveys his “undivided interest in the estate of [his] father/uncle Kahoiwai[,]” and 
specifically mentions his undivided interest in the Maui property; (2) David 
received the Property by deed from his father Kahoiwai; and (3) Pahukula did 
not convey an interest in the Property while the other three heirs did, there may be a question as to whether Pahukula was advanced his interest in the 
Property. In that case, Defendants would share a 2/3 interest, while KLL would have a 1/3 interest in the Property.  
42
    
  
  
 
  
  
        and remand this case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Steven S.C. Lim and    
Arsima A Muller 
for petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
Camille K. Kalama and   
David K. Kopper 
for respondents   
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Richard K. Perkins 
43
 