 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I   
 
 
 
 
                                                                 
 
  
 
 
 
    
   
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0001017 25-MAY-2017 
09:21 AM 
---o0o--
-
STATE OF HAWAI I,
   
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,
  
 
vs. 
 
 
RICK TRINQUE, 
  
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee,
  
 
and 
 
 
MILES MARTINEZ, 
  
Defendant.
  
SCWC-12-0001017  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(CAAP-12-0001017
; CR. NO. 12-1-0105)
 
MAY 25, 2017  
 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.,  AND CIRCUIT 
COURT JUDGE CHANG, IN PLACE OF NAKAYAMA, J., UNAVAILABLE
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.
  
I. INTRODUCTION 
On March 19, 2009, 
Rick Trinque was arrested in a 
pasture and handcuffed by the police who were conducting an  
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
   
  
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
   
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
investigation involving the growing of marijuana.  Prior to 
apprising Trinque of his Miranda rights, police obtained two 
statements from Trinque. Later, at the police station, police 
obtained a third statement from Trinque when he invoked his right 
to counsel while being given Miranda warnings.  The Circuit Court 
of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court) concluded that the first and second statements had been unlawfully elicited from Trinque, as 
they resulted from pre-Miranda custodial interrogation, and that 
the third statement was a product of the two earlier illegally 
obtained statements. The circuit court accordingly excluded the 
statements from being used as evidence at trial.  The State 
appealed the circuit court’ s decision regarding the second and 
third statements. The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
disagreed with the circuit court and vacated its ruling as to the 
second and third statements. 
In his application for certiorari, Trinque contends that 
the circuit court correctly ruled that the second and third statements were obtained in violation of his constitutional rights 
and that the ICA gravely erred in vacating the circuit court’s 
decision. For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that the 
ICA erred in vacating the ruling of the circuit court. 
2
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
                         
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
II.  BACKGROUND 
A. Underlying arrest 
In the days prior to March 19, 2009, the Kaua i Police 
Department (KPD) received information that there was marijuana 
growing in a 25-acre pasture in K īlauea, Kaua i, and initiated an 
investigation. On March 19, 2009, KPD officers were conducting 
nighttime surveillance in the pasture when they encountered 
Trinque, who was placed under arrest and immediately placed in 
handcuffs by Officer Brian Silva (the case agent in charge of the 
operation) while still in the pasture.1 Miles Martinez was also 
arrested in the pasture. Both Trinque and Martinez were ordered to sit on rocks within the pasture while officers took pictures of 
them and obtained their identification.  As Officer Silva and 
another officer were escorting Trinque out of the pasture, one of 
the officers asked Trinque how he came into the field. Trinque 
responded that “he came over the fence by the banana tree using a 
ladder that was still located by the fence and that he was caught 
red handed” (Statement 1). Once out of the pasture, Trinque was 
ordered by the officers to sit on a wooden bench. Trinque 
remained handcuffed. 
1 Trinque was “at least one of the targets of [KPD’s] investigation.” 
Lt. Richard Rosa stated that “[b]ecause of the briefing that we had prior [to 
March 19] . . . we had the names of two of the suspects based on who lived 
there and stuff, and the officers told me who the y were.” 
3
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
      
   
                         
 
   
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Officer Silva directed Lt. Richard Rosa to watch over 
Trinque. Lt. Rosa was the supervisor for the vice unit and a case 
supervisor at that time. That night, Lt. Rosa was dressed in 
plain clothes, with his police badge around his neck. Lt. Rosa 
had never met Trinque before , but “he knew Rick Trinque by name” 
because Trinque’s da ughter, whom Lt. Rosa had previously assisted 
in a case, had informed him that Trinque was her father.2 KPD 
officers told Lt. Rosa who the two detained suspects were, and Lt. 
Rosa knew that it was Trinque sitting on the wooden bench when he 
approached. 
Lt. Rosa identified himself to Trinque as Lt. Rosa from 
the Narcotic Unit of KPD, and he informed Trinque that he was the 
officer who worked on his daughter’s case. Lt. Rosa then told 
Trinque “that if [Trinque ] did not believe him, he could talk to 
his daughter about it.” In an apparent effort to emphasize his 
trustworthiness, Lt. Rosa told Trinque that “he would not lie to him.” Next, he informed Trinque that he would not “jerk his 
chain.” And, to underscore this point, Lt. Rosa told Trinque that 
“he would be completely honest with him.” During these 
statements, Trinque “sat there listening” and did not speak to Lt. 
Rosa. When Lt. Rosa “told Trinque to not make any statements 
2 Prior to being assigned to the vice unit, Lt. Rosa was the district 
commander in Hanalei when he “assisted” Trinque’s daughter with her case. Lt. 
Rosa met Trinque’s daughter when she expressed to him that she was having 
problems with persons who might have intended to assault her father. 
4
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
                         
 
   
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
until [they] got back to Lihue where we could advise him of his 
rights,”3 Trinque responded, “What for? You caught us red handed, 
there’s nothing left to say, times are hard and we needed the 
money” (Statement 2) . 
Soon after, Lt. Rosa and Officer Silva transported 
Trinque to the Līhue police station, where he was booked and 
placed in an interrogation room. Both Lt. Rosa and Officer Silva 
were present during Trinque’s interview in the interrogation room. 
Trinque was informed of his constitutional rights via the KPD Form 
364.  Officer Silva asked Trinque if he wanted an attorney, and 
Trinque responded that he did.4 Officer Silva then asked Trinque 
3 Lt. Rosa noted that there were other police officers around at the 
time he approached Trinque and agreed that it was possible to have read Trinque 
his rights at the scene. 
4 Nowhere on the KPD 364 Form, entitled “Informing Persons Being 
Interrogated of Their Constitutional Rights,” does it direct police officers to 
ask whether a defendant wants an attorney.   Specifically, No. 6 on the form 
states, “Do you understand that you have the right to talk to a lawyer before answering any questions and to have him or her present while I talk to you?” 
Thus, the question asks whether the individual understands that he or she has a 
right to have an attorney present, not whether he or she wants an attorney. 
On direct examination during the circuit court hearing, Officer 
Silva testified as follows: 
Q: Did Mr. Trinque respond when you asked him whether he 
wanted an attorney or not? A: Yes. 
Q: What was his reply? 
A: He wanted to talk to an attorney. 
On cross
-examination, Officer Silva was less confident: 
Q: . . . So at what point did you ask him if he wanted an 
attorney? 
A: Um, he might have told me he wanted an attorney, and 
that was the end 
of the conversation. 
(continued . . .)  
5
  
 
 
 
   
    
     
 
 
 
  
                                                                                 
 
  
   
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether or not he wanted to make a statement.5 Trinque replied 
that he did not want to make a statement since “he got caught red -
handed and was going to jail anyway.”6 (Statement 3) During the 
approximately three hours following Trinque ’s arrest, Lt. Rosa 
remained at Trinque’s side from their initial contact, during 
transport, and to Trinque’s placement in the interrogation room 
where Statement 3 was obtained. 
B. Circuit court proceedings 
On February 23, 2012, Trinque was charged by indictment 
with Commercial Promotion of Marijuana in the First Degree, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1249.4(1)(c) 
(. . . continued) 
Q: What do you mean he might have told you? 
A:  This happened almost four years ago. He might have 
told me he wanted an attorney as I’m going through the 
rights, and I said okay, fine.  We’re not going through this.  
5 The sequence of questions and answers between Officer Silva and 
Trinque is unclear from the transcript of the hearing on the motions. However, the transcript could be read to indicate that Officer Silva continued speaking 
with Trinque after Trinque made clear that he wanted an attorney.  We note 
that, if this were the case, Officer Silva would have violated the well -
established rule that “once the right to counsel has been invoked all 
questioning must cease.” 
State v. Mailo,  69 Haw. 51, 52, 731 P.2d 1264, 1266 
(1987). It is not necessary to resolve this issue in light of our disposition 
of this case. 
6 Trinque’s interview by Officer Silva and Lt. Rosa in the 
interrogation room was not audio or video recorded, despite officers having 
access to a digital recorder. Offic er Silva stated that Trinque’s interview 
was not recorded because, at that time, KPD policy did not require officers to 
do so. While Officer Silva took notes when interviewing Trinque, he shredded 
them once he finished his report. 
6
  
 
 
 
  
 
  The State filed a Motion to Determine  Voluntariness of 
Statements, contend  ing that Trinque   made inculpatory statements 
upon arrest and that the statements were admissible at trial. 
Trinque filed a motion seeking to suppress Statements 1, 2, and 3 
on the grounds that they were obtained in violation of his 
constitutional rights under article I, sections 5 and 10 of the 
Hawaii Constitution  and the Fifth and Fourteenth   Amendments to the 
United States Constitution  (Motion to Suppress Statements).  
Trinque contended that he was subjected to pre- Miranda  custodial 
interrogation when he made Statements  1 and 2, in violation of his 
                         
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(1993), and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia , in violation of 
HRS § 329-43.5(a) (1993).7 
7 HRS § 712 -1249.4(1)(c) provides as follows: 
(1) A person commits the offense of commercial promotion of 
marijuana in the first degree if the person knowingly: 
. . . . 
(c)
 Possesses, cultivates, or has under the person’s 
control one hundred or more marijuana plants .  .  .  .  
The applicable version of 
HRS § 329- 43.5(a) states the following: 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess 
with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, 
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, 
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise 
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in 
violation of this chapter. Any person who violates this 
section is guilty of a class C felony and upon conviction may 
be imprisoned pursuant to section 70 6-660 and, if appropriate 
as provided in section 706 -641, fined pursuant to section 
706-640. 
Martinez was jointly indicted with Trinque upon the same charges. 
7
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
      
 
 
 
 
                         
 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
right against self-incrimination.  Trinque also argued that his 
post-Miranda statement (Statement 3) should be suppressed as a 
“fruit of the poisonous tree” because “the statement was made 
under the taint of the two prior poli ce illegalities.”  
In its response, the State argued that Trinque 
“voluntarily made inculpatory statements upon arrest.” The State 
maintained that Statement 1 was a spontaneous statement and that 
Statements 2 and 3 “were voluntary and not the result of KPD 
coercion.” Further, the State contended that Trinque’s statements 
were independent of police questioning and that Trinque kept 
talking even after he was advised not to make a statement until he 
was taken to the station and given Miranda warnings. 
Following a hearing on the motions,8 the circuit court 
issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting 
Defendant’s Motion to Suppress Statements (Order Suppressing 
Statements), in which it determined that, as to Statement 1, Trinque was “in custody for purposes of Miranda ” from the moment 
he was placed in handcuffs in the pasture. The court found that 
either Officer Silva or the other officer escorting Trinque out of 
the pasture specifically asked Trinque how he came into the field 
and that the question prompted Trinque to respond that he “came 
over the fence by the banana tree using a ladder that was still 
8  The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided over the case. 
8
  
 
 
 
   
      
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
located by the fence and that he was caught red handed.” The 
circuit court concluded that “asking the defendant how he got into 
the pasture was an illegal custodial interrogation that the 
officer knew or should have known was reasonably likely to elicit 
an incriminating response ” and that the question did in fact 
improperly elicit Statement 1. 
The circuit court further concluded that Statement 2 was 
the product of an illegal, pre-Miranda custodial interrogation. 
The court held that Lt. Rosa’s “unsolicited statements” to Trinque 
amounted to “statements that were designed to garner the trust of the defendant . . . and invite the defendant to open up.” Thus, 
the circuit court concluded that Lt. Rosa conducted an 
unauthorized pre-Miranda interrogation in violation of Trinque’s 
constitutional rights.  The circuit court stated that “there was 
no legitimate reason ” for Lt. Rosa to make these statements to 
Trinque, including: 
telling [Trinque] that he wasn’t sure if [Trinque] knew who 
he was, but that he was the Officer who worked on [his] 
daughter’s case, that if Trinque did not believe him, [he] 
could talk to his daughter about it, that he would not lie to 
[Trinque], he would not “jerk his chain,” and that he would 
be completely honest with him.  
The circuit court concluded that Lt. Rosa knew or should have 
known that his statements would likely elicit an incriminating 
response. The court further held that Lt. Rosa’s statement --that 
Trinque should not make a statement until he was taken to the 
Līhue police station--was presupposition on Lt. Rosa ’s part and 
9
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
                         
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
that it “wrongly informed [Trinque] that his statement would be 
taken once they read him his rights. ” 
As to Statement 3, the circuit court concluded that it 
“was a ‘fruit’ or an exploitation of the prior illegality of the 
‘pre-interview’ conducted by [Lt.] Rosa.” The court held that 
Statement 3 was not sufficiently attenuated from Lt. Rosa’s unauthorized, pre-Miranda interview for the taint of the prior 
illegality to dissipate because (1) the same officer (Lt. Rosa) 
remained with Trinque through the entire process; (2) Statement 3 
came within hours of the pre-interview Miranda violation; and (3) 
Statement 3, elicited post-Miranda , was in effect the same thing 
Trinque said to Lt. Rosa (Statement 2). 
The circuit court therefore granted Trinque’s Motion to 
Suppress Statements and issued an Order Suppressing Statements and 
an Order Denying State of Hawaii’s Voluntariness of Statements.
9 
The State timely appealed from these orders. 
C. Appellate Proceedings 
The State raised two issues in its appeal: (1) whether 
the trial court erred in concluding that Statement 2 was the 
product of a custodial interrogation and in suppressing Statement 
The circuit court’s Order Denying Voluntariness was predicated on 
its suppression ruling in favor of Trinque: “The Court having taken judicial 
notice of the files and records herein and having heard evidence and argument in the matter, and having GRANTED [ Trinque’s] Motion to Suppress Statements, 
hereby ORDERS that the State’s Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Statements 
is hereby DENIED.” 
10
 9  
 
 
 
   In a published opinion, the ICA held  that the circuit 
court erred in suppressing Statement 2 on Miranda  grounds because 
Statement 2 was made when 
Lt.  Rosa told Trinque that he should not  
make any statements  until he had been  advised of his 
constitutional rights.   State v. Trinque , 137 Hawai i 130, 133, 366  
P.3d 186, 189 (App. 2016), cert. granted , No. SCWC-12-0001017, 
2016 WL 3129189 (Haw. June 2, 2016).   The ICA noted that “there 
was no basis for the circuit court to conclude that [Lt.] Rosa  
should have known that his words or actions in telling Trinque not 
to speak were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response.” Id.  
   
 
     
  
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 on that basis; and (2) whether the trial court erred in 
suppressing Statement 3 as the unlawful fruit of Statements 1 and 
2. The State did not challenge  the suppression of Statement 1.   
Further, the ICA concluded that neither 
Statement 2 nor 
Statement 3 was subject to suppression as an unlawful fruit of 
previous statements. Id. at 134, 366 P.3d at 190. The ICA held 
that Statement 2 was not an unlawful fruit of Statement 1 because the police did not exploit Statement 1 to obtain Statement 2.  Id.  
The ICA also held that Statement 3 was not subject to suppression 
as an unlawful fruit of Statement 
2 because Statement 2 was not 
the product of interrogation.  Id. In addition, the ICA 
determined that Statement 3 was not a fruit of Statement 1 because 
Trinque made Statement 3 post-Miranda, police did not exploit 
11
  
 
 
 
  
   Id.  
  
  
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Statement 1 to obtain Statement 3, and Statement 3 was a non-
responsive reply to the question asked. 
The ICA vacated the circuit court’s Order Suppressing 
Statements and Order Denying Voluntariness of Statements, and the 
case was remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
Id. at 135, 366 P.3d at 191. On certiorari, Trinque presents the 
following question: whether the ICA gravely erred in vacating the 
circuit court’s decision suppressing Statements 2 and 3 to the 
police. 
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
This court reviews a trial court’ s factual findings 
under the clearly erroneous standard. State v. Romano , 114 Hawai i  
1, 8, 155 P.3d 1102, 1109 (2007).  
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence 
to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the 
definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. A finding of fact is also 
clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence 
to support the finding. We have defined substantial evidence 
as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and 
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
Lambert v. Waha , 137 Hawai i  423, 431, 375 P.3d  202, 210 (2016)    
(quoting Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158  
(2004)). A trial court’s conclusions of law are reviewed under 
the right/wrong standard. State v. Joseph, 109 Hawai i 482, 493, 
128 P.3d 795, 806 (2006) . Where a conclusion of law “ presents 
mixed questions of fact and law ,” it “ is reviewed under the 
12

  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
    
    
 
   
 
   
 
                         
 
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
clearly erroneous standard because the court’ s conclusions are 
dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual 
case.” State v. Furutani , 76 Hawai i 172, 180, 873 P.2d 51, 59 
(1994) (quoting AIG Haw. Ins. Co. v. Estate of Caraang , 74 Haw. 
620, 629, 851 P.2d 321, 326 (1993)
). 
IV.  DISCUSSION 
The privilege against self-incrimination guaranteed by 
article I, section 10 of the Hawai i Constitution requires that 
Miranda warnings be given to an accused in order for statements 
obtained during custodial interrogation to be admissible at 
trial.10 State v. Joseph , 109 Hawai i 482, 493 –94, 128 P.3d 795, 
806–07 (2006). It is well settled that Miranda is 
a constitutionally prescribed rule of evidence that requires 
the prosecution to lay a sufficient foundation--i.e., that 
the requisite warnings were administered and validly waived before the accused gave the statement sought to be adduced at 
trial--before it may adduce evidence of a defendant’s 
custodial statements that stem from interrogation during his 
or her criminal trial. 
State v. Ketchum , 97 Hawai i 107, 117, 34 P.3d 1006, 1016 (2001). 
Thus, unless Miranda warnings are given, statements made by the 
accused that result from custodial interrogation, along with the 
fruits of such statements, “may not be used either as direct 
evidence in the prosecutor’s case in chief or to impeach the 
10 The relevant portion of article I, section 10 that embodies the 
Miranda requirement states that “[ n]o person shall be . . . compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against oneself.” Haw. Const. art. I, § 10 . 
13
  
 
 
 
    
    
    
 
  The illegality in obtaining  Statement 1 in this case is 
undisputed, so two issues remain for this court’s resolution: (1) 
whether Statement 2 was obtained as a result of pre- Miranda  
custodial interrogation and in violation of Trinque’s right to remain silent and (2) whether Statement 3 is a fruit of Statement 
1, Statement 2, or both.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
                         
 
   
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
defendant’s credibility during rebuttal or cross -examination.” 
Joseph, 109 Hawai i at 493–94, 128 P.3d at 806 –07 (quoting State v. 
Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 265–66, 492 P.2d 657, 664 (1971)); see 
State v. Pebria , 85 Hawai i 171, 174–75, 938 P.2d 1190, 1193 –94 
(1997).11 
A. 
Whether Statement 2 was obtained in violation of Trinque’s 
right to remain silent as a result of “un -Mirandized custodial 
interrogation” 
Trinque argues that the circuit court correctly 
suppressed Statement 2 because Lt. Rosa subjected him to custodial 
interrogation prior to advising him of his Miranda rights. 
Trinque contends that, while Lt. Rosa did not expressly question him, Lt. Rosa’s statements “constituted custodial interrogation as they were designed to invoke an incriminating response.” Trinque 
11 This court decreed that Miranda protections “have an independent 
source in the Hawaii Constitution’s privilege against self -incrimination” in 
Santiago, 53 Haw. at 266, 492 P.2d at 664.  In that case, not only did this 
court incorporate Miranda into the Hawai i Constitution, the court also 
broadened Miranda protections based on the Hawai i Constitution. See id.   
(disagreeing with the U.S. Supreme Court’s holding in Harris v. New York, 401 
U.S.
 222 (1971), and concluding that statements elicited through pre -Miranda  
custodial interrogation may not be used at trial for impeachment purposes). 
14
  
 
 
 
  
  Pursuant to article I, section 10 of the Hawai i  
Constitution, a  statement made before the defendant is apprised of 
his or her Miranda  rights is not constitutionally elicited if it 
is established  that the “statement was the result of (1) 
‘interrogation’ that occurred while he or she was (2) ‘in 
custody.’” State v. Kazanas, 138 Hawai i 23, 35, 375 P.3d 1261,  
1273 (2016) (quoting Ketchum, 97 Hawai i at 118, 34 P.3d at 1017).    
In this case, there is no dispute that Trinque was in custody when 
Lt. Rosa elicited  Statement 2  from Trinque,   as Trinque was already 
arrested and handcuffed.  See  State v. Eli,   126 Hawai i 510, 521 – 
22, 273 P.3d 1196, 1207 –08 (2012) (concluding that the defendant 
was deprived of his freedom in a significant way after he had been 
placed under arrest); accord  Kazanas, 138 Hawai i at 35, 375 P.3d   
at 1273; State v. Amorin , 61 Haw. 356, 360, 604 P.2d 45, 48 
(1979). Thus, the decisive  issue  is whether Lt.  Rosa’s actions 
constituted “interrogation” under article I, section 10.  
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
maintains that Lt. Rosa’s statements were made for “no leg itimate 
reason . . . other than to ingratiate himself to Trinque” and 
“entice him into making a statement.” 
As previously explained by this court, “interrogation” 
encompasses “not only . . . express questioning, but also . . . 
any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those 
normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should 
15
  
 
 
 
     
  Thus, “interrogation” is “any practice reasonably likely 
to invoke an incriminating response without regard to objective 
evidence of the intent of the police .”  Joseph, 109 Hawai i at 495, 
12 128 P.3d at 808  (emphasis added).   “An incriminating response’ 
refers to both inculpatory and exculpatory responses.”  Id. 
(citing State v. Wallace , 105 Hawai i 131, 137, 94 P.3d 1275, 1281 
(2004)). 
  There are several important considerations  in this 
court’s definition: “interrogation” under Miranda  refers to (1) 
                         
 
  
 
 
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response 
from the suspect.” State v. Joseph , 109 Hawai i 482, 495, 12 8 P.3d 
795, 808 (2006) (quoting State v. Jenkins , 1 Haw. App. 430, 437-
38, 620 P.2d 263, 269 (1980)).  
The latter portion of the definition focuses primarily upon 
the perceptions of the suspect, rather than the intent of the 
police. This focus reflects the fact that the Miranda  
safeguards were designed to vest a suspect in custody with an 
added measure of protection against coercive police 
practices, without regard to objective proof of the 
underlying intent of the police. A practice that the police 
should know is reasonably likely to evoke an incriminating 
response from a suspect thus amounts to interrogation.  
Id.; accord Kazanas , 138 Hawai i at 39, 375 P.3d at 1277.  
12 A “practice” includes any method or proc edure that law enforcement 
officers use in the course of interacting with individuals in custody, regardless of whether such method or procedure is officially approved by the law enforcement department with which the officers are employed. 
See, e.g., 
Joseph,
 109 Hawai i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808 (pre -interview for the purpose of 
obtaining a statement); Kazanas, 138 Hawai i at 40, 375 P.3d at 1278 (asking the 
defendant in the police department’s private room in the hospital how his night 
was going); Eli, 126 Hawai i at 522 –23, 273 P.3d at 1208 –09 (officer “asking 
Defendant for his side of the story and indicating that it was his chance to 
give that story”). 
16
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  In this case,  Trinque  was arrested in the  late evening  
in an open pasture.   Upon his arrest, police handcuffed Tri nque,  
escorted him from the pasture, and then ordered  him to sit on a 
wooden bench while still handcuffed.  Lt. Rosa  approached Trinque 
and identified  himself as Lt. Rosa from the Narcotic Unit of KPD.  
Lt. Rosa then  explained to Trinque that he was the police officer 
who had worked on  Trinque’s  daughter ’s case. Lt. Rosa told 
Trinque “that if [Trinque] did not believe him, he could talk to 
his daughter about it.” Lt. Rosa then continued with trust-
building statements.  He told Trinque that he would not lie to him. He advised Trinque that he   “wouldn’t jerk his chain.”   
Finally, Lt. Rosa informed Trinque  that “he would be completely 
honest” with him. Only after giving Trinque all of these personal 
assurances regarding his trustworthiness did Lt. Rosa tell Trinque 
not to make any more statements  until he was taken to th e police 
station in Līhu e. Trinque responded, “What for?  You caught us 
red-handed; times are hard and we needed the money.”  
  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
any words, actions, or practice on the part of the police, not 
only express questioning, (2) other than those normally attendant 
to arrest and custody, and (3) that the police should know is 
reasonably likely to invoke an incriminating response. 
While Lt. Rosa’s introduc tion of himself to Trinque as a 
police officer may have been normal procedure that typically attends arrests, all of the other words and actions that Lt. Rosa 
17
  
 
 
 
                          
 
 13  The ICA stated that it is unclear why it would be improper for Lt. 
Rosa “to inform Trinque that he had worked on Trinque’s daughter’s case and to tell Trinque that he would not lie to Trinque and would be completely honest 
with Trinque” since this was simply an “apparent attempt to develop rapport 
with Trinque.” 
State v. Trinque,   137 Hawai i 130, 133, 366 P.3d  186, 189  (App. 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
directed to Trinque cannot be characterized  as anything other than  
an attempt to erode  Trinque’s guard so that  Trinque would free  ly 
talk in a manner that would incriminate himself.   As aptly 
determined by the circuit court, Lt. Rosa’s words and  conduct had 
“no legitimate reason” and “were designed to garner the  trust of 
the defendant, invite  the defendant to be honest .  . ., and invite  
the defendant to open up.” By stating that he helped Trinque’s 
daughter in a  previous matter, Lt. Rosa’s words may have been 
reasonably understood by Trinque as an offer of similar assistance  
or at least as an assurance that Lt. Rosa was an ally when in fact 
he was in an adversar  ial position.  See Kazanas , 138 Hawai i at 40, 
375 P.3d at 1278 (reasoning that the police officer is part “of a 
system that was adversarial to” the defendant, such that the 
police officer engaging in a conversation w ith an arrestee “could 
not be ‘solely in [the arrestee’s] best interest’”) .   Couple this 
with Lt. Rosa’s  statement that  he would be honest and not lie to 
Trinque and that he would not “jerk [Trinque’s] chain”  and it  is 
readily apparent  that the circuit court  did not clearly err in 
finding that Lt. Rosa was attempting to garner Trinque’s trust so 
13 that Trinque would open up.  
(continued . . .) 
18
  
 
 
 
   Although Lt. Rosa testified that his intent in 
initiating the conversation with Trinque was merely to identify 
himself as a police officer,  as he was unshaven and in civilian 
clothing, Lt. Rosa’s intent is not determinative in analyzing 
whether his words and  conduct amounted to interrogation.  Joseph, 
109 Hawai i at 495, 128 P.3d at 808 (stating that whether an  
interrogation had transpired primarily focuses on the perceptions 
of the defendant)
;  Kazanas, 138 Hawai i at 39  —40, 375 P.3d at  1277— 
78 (noting that  a police officer’s “subjective intent”  may not be 
used to excuse conduct that reasonably could have elicited an 
14  incriminating response from the defendant).
  
 
 
                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 14  Intent of police officer “may be relevant where, for example, ‘a 
police practice is designed to elicit an incriminating response from the 
accused,’ as it would be ‘unlikely that the practice will not also be one which the police should have known was reasonably likely to have that effect.’” 
Kazanas, 138 Hawai i  at 39–40, 375 P.3d at 1277 –78 (quoting Rhode Island v. 
Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 301 n.7 (1980)). Thus, while police intent may not be 
used to excuse conduct that reasonably could have elicited an incriminating response, it may be used as “evidence that the p olice know that they have 
designed a practice reasonably meant to elicit incriminating responses” --that 
is, a practice amounting to interrogation. Id.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Indeed, t he circuit court firmly rejected Lt. Rosa’s 
explanation of his motive, and the court did not clearly err in 
this regard. Not only was that court in the best position to 
evaluate credibility, but the circumstances plainly contradict Lt. 
Rosa’s explanation. Lt. Rosa was wearing a police badge, and 
(. . . continued)
  
2016), cert. granted, No. SCWC- 12 -0001017, 2016 WL 3129189 (Haw. June 2, 2016).  
However, Lt. Rosa’s repeated personal assurances to Trinque, including 
references to Trinque’s daughter, were, as determined by the circuit court, 
intended to earn Trinque’s trust, invite d Trinque to be honest and to open up, 
and were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating statement from Trinque.
 
19
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Trinque and Martinez were both under arrest and handcuffed. 
Several other officers were in the area.  If Lt. Rosa’s sole 
intention was to identify himself as a police officer, he would 
have had to do no more than show Trinque his badge and identify 
himself in order to establish his status as a police officer. If 
Lt. Rosa merely intended to introduce himself to Trinque, then 
there was no legitimate reason for him to say that he assisted 
Trinque’s daughter in a previous matter, that he would be honest 
and truthful to Trinque, and that he would not “jerk [Trinque’s ]  
chain.”  
In addition, Lt. Rosa’s st atement  to Trinque to not make  
any more statements until  he was taken to the police station in 
Līhue was inaccurate --for Trinque was not required to make a  
statement even after he had been advised of his constitutional rights--and Trinque may  have reasonably been  given the impression  
that he might as well speak to Lt. Rosa then and there, since  he 
would be making  a statement at the station  anyway.  Essentially, 
Lt. Rosa was implicitly inviting Trinque to speak since  he ( Lt. 
Rosa) would be honest, helpful, and truthful while another police  
officer may or may not be.  Under the circumstances of this case,  
where Lt. Rosa ingratiated himself to Trinque and implied that he was someone who might be able to provide some form of assistance,  
the wording of Lt. Rosa’s flawed advisory  (“to not make any more 
statements until he was taken to the police station” ) was 
20

  
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
    
   
                         
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
reasonably likely to elicit Statement 3 ( “What for? You caught us 
red-handed; times are hard and we needed the money.” ). Indeed, 
Trinque’s reply (“What for?”) was directly responsive to Lt. 
Rosa’s advisory .15 Alternatively, Lt. Rosa’s words could 
objectively be viewed as an attempt to establish himself as a 
confidante, off the record, so that when it became time to provide 
the Miranda warnings, Trinque would trust Lt. Rosa as someone who 
would not pull his chain and thus making it more likely that 
Trinque would waive his Miranda rights. 
The State relies on State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 698 
P.2d 281 (1985) , in arguing that Lt. Rosa’s words and conduct were 
a mere pleasantry 
that did not amount to interrogation. The 
defendant in Ikaika confessed 
to a police officer, who was 
acquainted with the defendant, after the police officer asked, “What’s happening? Must be heavy stuff for two detectives to 
bring you down here?” Id. at 565, 698 P.2d at 283.  This court 
held that the police officer’s statement was a mere “pleasantry” 
not amounting to interrogation and that the defendant’s 
15 The ICA concluded that Lt. Rosa’s statement was entirely 
appropriate, reasoning that “[i]t is difficul t to see how telling a defendant 
not to make a statement can constitute ‘interrogation.’” Trinque, 137 Hawai i 
at 133, 366 P.3d at 189. However, Lt. Rosa’s defective advisory may not be 
viewed in isolation; it followed a series of statements that the circuit court 
correctly viewed as having no legitimate reason and was designed to garner 
Trinque’s trust so that he would open up. Viewing all of these statements in 
conjunction with the incorrectly stated advisory, Lt. Rosa’s words and actions 
were reasonably likely to elicit, and did elicit, an incriminating response 
from Trinque. 
21
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
     
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
                         
 
     
    
  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“confession was of the nature of an unsolicited, spontaneous 
statement made in the absence of any police questioning.” Id.  at 
567, 698 P.2d 
at 285.  Ikaika is inapposite 
for the reasons 
16enumerated in Kazanas.
As explained by the Kazanas court, the police officer 
and the defendant in Ikaika were previously acquainted, and the 
police officer was unaware of the circumstances surrounding the 
defendant’s arrest. See Kazanas , 138 Hawai i at 38, 375 P.3d at 
1276; Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 565, 698 P.2d at 283.  Thus, in Ikaika , 
the police officer’s words reasonably could be characterized and 
perceived by the defendant as a pleasantry not likely to elicit an 
incriminating response. Kazanas, 138 Hawai i at 38, 375 P.3d at 
1276; Ikaika, 67 Haw. at 567, 698 P.2d at 284 –85 (reasoning that, 
under the facts of the case, the police officer  could not  “have or 
should [not] have reasonably foreseen that his words or actions  
would elicit an incriminating response from the Defendant” and 
that, “[a]t most, [the police officer] could have expected that 
the Defendant respond to his pleasantry by informing him of the 
reasons for the Defendant’s being booked and the case he was 
involved in”).  
16 The issue in Kazanas was whether the defendant, post- arrest, should 
have been advised of his Miranda right s before the police officer engaged him 
in small talk while they were inside HPD’s private room at a hospital --a 
conversation that then resulted in the defendant’s utterance of an 
incriminating statement.  Kazanas, 138 Hawai i at 26, 40, 375 P.3d at 1264, 
1278. 
22
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
       
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In this case,  as in Kazanas, Lt. Rosa and Trinque were  
not previously acquainted; in fact, the night of Trinque’s arrest 
was the first time that Lt. Rosa met him.  See Kazanas  , 138 Hawai i 
at 38, 375 P.3d  at 1276.    In addition, just like the police 
officer in Kazanas , Lt. Rosa knew the circumstances behind 
Trinque’s arrest since he was previously briefed on the matter. 
See id.   Thus, when Lt. Rosa stated that he assisted Trinque’s  
daughter on a previous case, that he would be honest and not lie to Trinque, and  that he would not “jerk [Trinque’s] chain,” Lt. 
Rosa’s statements  deliberately ingratiated himself to Trinque  and 
cannot be taken as  “a mere pleasantry. ”   See  id.  
It is als
o noted that the police officer’s conduct in 
Kazanas that this court held as constituting interrogation was 
less egregious than Lt. Rosa’s conduct in this case. In Kazanas, 
the police officer did not guarantee to the defendant that she 
would be honest and truthful and did not ingratiate herself to the 
defendant or imply that she may be able to offer some assistance 
for the defendant’s benefit; the police officer in Kazanas solely 
asked a question whose answer she already knew and that, 
objectively viewed, was reasonably likely to evoke an 
incriminating response. Id. at 26, 375 P.3d at 1264. Here, Lt. 
Rosa expressly claimed that he would be honest and truthful and that he would not mislead Trinque.  And by stating that he helped 
Trinque’s daughter in the past, Lt. Rosa at least intimated that 
23
  
 
 
 
   See  
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
                         
 
   
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
he was a friendly party, that he may be able to similarly assist 
Trinque, and that he should not be viewed as an adversary. 
id. at 40, 375 P.3d at 1278. 
In summary, Trinque was in custody when the exchange 
with Lt. Rosa occurred because he was handcuffed, and Lt. Rosa’s 
words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating 
response from Trinque, id., because (1) Lt. Rosa stated that 
Trinque could trust him, that he would not mislead Trinque, and 
that he would be honest; (2) Lt. Rosa intimated that he was a 
friendly party given that he had previously assisted Trinque’s 
daughter in another case; (3) Lt. Rosa ’s ingratiating words and 
actions towards Trinque had no legitimate reason other than to invoke Trinque’s trust and to induce him to open up ; and (4) Lt. 
Rosa misinformed Trinque of his constitutional rights. Accordingly, Statement 2 was elicited by an unlawful, pre-Miranda 
custodial interrogation, and therefore, the circuit court did not 
clearly err in suppressing this statement pursuant to article I, 
section 10 of the Hawai i Constitution. The ICA erred in 
concluding otherwise.
17 
17 Trinque also argues that Statement 2 was a “fruit of the poisonous 
tree” because Trinque’s statement to Officer Silva (Statement 1) was illegally 
obtained. The circuit court suppressed Statement 2 based on the conclusion 
that it was elicited through an unlawful, pre- Miranda custodial interrogation. 
The circuit court did not address whether Statement 2 should be suppressed as 
an illegal fruit of Statement 1. The ICA ruled that Statement 2 should not 
have been suppressed for two reasons: because it was not a product of an 
illegal interrogation and because it was not an illegal fruit of Statement 1. 
(continued . . .) 
24
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
  “[T]he  ‘fruit of the poisonous tree’ doctrine ‘prohibits 
the use of evidence at trial which comes to light as a result of 
the exploitation of a previous illegal act of the police.’” State 
v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 462, 475, 946 P.2d 32, 45 (1997) (quoting 
State v. Medeiros , 4 Haw. App. 248, 251 n.4, 665 P.2d 181, 184 n.4 
(1983)). “Under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, 
[a]dmissibility is determined by ascertaining whether the evidence 
objected to as being ‘fruit’ was discovered or became known by the 
                    
(. . . continued)                                                               
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. Whether Statement 3 was tainted by Statements 1 and 2 under 
the “fruit of the poisonous tree ” doctrine 
Trinque argues that Statement 3 was correctly suppressed 
by the circuit court as a “fruit of the poisonous tree” of the 
unlawfully obtained statement he made to Officer Silva (Statement 
1) because Statement 3 was made only a few hours after Statement 1 
and there was a direct connection between Statement 1 and 
Statement 3. In addition, Trinque contends that Statement 3 is a 
fruit of Statement 2 because Statement 3 was made within hours after Statement 2 and was a direct result of Lt. Rosa’s unla wful, 
pre-Miranda interrogation. The ICA ruled that Statement 3 was not subject to suppression as the unlawful fruit of Statement 1 or 
Statement 2. 
Because we conclude that Statement 2 was a product of an unlawful, pre -Miranda 
custodial interrogation, we need not reach the issue of whether Statement 2 is 
a fruit of Statement 1. 
However, our disposition should not be viewed as an 
endorsement of the ICA’s resolution of this issue. 
25
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
    
  
 
                         
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
exploitation of the prior illegality or by other means 
sufficiently distinguished as to purge the later evidence of the 
initial taint. ” State v. Poaipuni , 98 Hawai i 387, 392–93, 49 P.3d 
353, 358–59 (2002) (alteration in original) (quoting Fukusaku , 85 
Hawaii at 475, 946 P.2d at 45). 
Where the government proves that the evidence was discovered 
through information from an independent source or where the 
connection between the illegal acts and the discovery of the 
evidence is so attenuated that the taint has been dissipated, 
the evidence is not a ‘fruit’ and, therefore, is admissible. . . .  
Id. (quoting Fukusaku , 85 Hawai i at 475, 946 P.2d at 45).18 
“In other words, the ultimate question that the fruit of 
the poisonous tree doctrine poses is as follows: Disregarding the 
prior illegality, would the police nevertheless have discovered 
the evidence?” Id. at 393, 49 P.3d at 359.  As applied to this 
case, the question posed is as follows: Would the police have 
obtained Statement 3 had they not violated Trinque’s 
constitutional rights in obtaining Statements 1 and 2. 
Accordingly, the State’s burden is to demonstrate that 
Statement 3 is not a benefit gained or an advantage derived by the 
police from the prior illegality or that the subsequent statement 
18 The Poaipuni court noted that, “[a]lthough we have characterized 
the independent source doctrine as an ‘exception’ to the exclusionary rule, it 
is, in essence, simply a corollary of the fruit of the poisonous tree 
doctrine.” Poaipuni , 98 Hawai
i at 393 n.6, 49 P.3d at 359 n.6. That is, if a 
confession or other evidence has an independent source, then it is not a fruit 
of the poisonous tree.  Id. 
26
  
 
 
 
  
 
                         
 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
has become sufficiently attenuated from the initial illegality so 
as to purge the taint. See State v. Eli , 126 Hawai i 510, 524, 273 
P.3d 1196, 1210 (2012) (reasoning that the State must demonstrate 
that the subsequent statement or confession was not predicated on 
the initial illegality); State v. Kitashiro , 48 Haw. 204, 218 —22, 
397 P.2d 558, 566 —68 (1964) (holding that the State must prove 
that the illegal search did not “induce” the defendant’s 
subsequent confession)
. 
Hawaii appellate courts have previously pronounced that 
whether a confession is sufficiently attenuated from the illegality depends on  the facts of a particular case, and  factors 
relevant to the analysis include  (1) the temporal proximity 
between the official misconduct and the subsequently procured 
statement or evidence, (2) the presence of intervening 
circumstances, and (3) the purpose and flagrancy of the  official 
misconduct. 
See  Eli, 126 Hawai i at 524, 273 P.3d  at 1210;  State 
v. Mariano, 114 Hawai i 271, 281, 160 P.3d 1258, 1268 (App.  
19 2007). 
In determining what constitutes exploitation that taints 
subsequently obtained evidence, previous “fruit of the poisonous 
tree” cases decided by this court are instructive. In State v. 
Joseph, this court held that a previous illegality was exploited 
19 See also  Brown v. Illinois , 422 U.S. 590, 603 –04 (1975). 
27
  
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to elicit a statement or confession where the defendant, post-
Miranda,  “was subsequently questioned on the same matter in order 
that he would repeat his earlier[, illegally obtained]  statement .” 
109 Hawai i 482, 499, 128 P.3d 795, 812 (2006) .  In Poaipuni, this 
court held that the physical evidence was inadmissible because it  
“came to light only  as a result of the exploitation of the 
previous illegality, i.e., the execution of the defective search 
warrant.” Poaipuni , 98 Hawai i at 393, 49 P.3d   at 359.  As to the  
subsequent confession, the Poaipuni  court explained  that it was 
also tainted by the unlawfully obtained physical evidence because, 
had the physical evidence  not been discovered, the officer would 
not have asked the question that resulted in the defendant’s  
confession.   Id.  at 394, 49 P.3d  at 360.   
In Eli, this court explained that the defendant’s 
“purported ‘waiver’ of his right to remain silent, made after Miranda warnings, was directly ‘predicated’ on his agreement, pre -
Miranda, to make a statement,” an agreement that he made without 
being apprised of his right to remain silent.  Eli, 126 Hawai i at   
524, 273 P.3d at 1210.  Under these circu  mstances, the court held 
that “the Mirandized statement was obtained by exploiting the 
illegality of the pre-interview procedure.” Id.   That is, the 
advantage derived from the improper police pre-interview procedure 
28

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  In this case, the circuit  court held that Statement 3 
was an exploitation of the prior illegality of Lt.  Rosa’s “pre -
interview” and, thus, inadmissible as evidence under “the fruit of 
the poisonous tree” doctrine. The circuit court concluded that 
the State failed to demonstrate that the statement was 
“sufficiently attenuated” from the illegally obtained Statements 1 and 2 to dissipate the taint of the police officers’ 
Miranda  
violation. The circuit court cited three reasons: (1) the same 
officer, Lt. Rosa, remained with Trinque through the entire 
process; (2) Statement 3 came within hours after Lt. Rosa’s “pre -
interview” Miranda  violation; and (3) Statement 3 was “in effect 
the same thing [Trinque] said to [Lt.] Rosa pre-Miranda.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
played a role in the statement obtained despite the intervention 
of properly administered Miranda warnings. 
The common thread that unifies these cases is that the 
prior illegality contributed in the subsequent obtainment of 
evidence, statements, or confessions.  Viewed another way, these 
cases involved the situation in which the State failed to 
demonstrate that the subsequently obtained evidence, statements, 
or confessions would have been discovered even in the absence of 
the prior illegality. That is, the State was unable to meet its 
burden of showing that the discovery of the challenged evidence 
was not a benefit derived from the prior illegality. 
29
  
 
 
  The circuit court ’s ruling --that Statement 3 was a fruit  
of Statements 1 and 2--is not clearly erroneous and supported by 
the State’s  failure to introduce  adequate evidence tending to  
demonstrate that Statement 3 would still have been obtained had the previous illegality that resulted in the utterance of 
Statements 1 and 2  not occurred.  The State does not discharge its 
burden of showing attenuation by relying on “surmise and 
inference.” 
Kitashiro,  48 Haw. at 222, 397 P.2d at 568 
(explaining that evidence  showing that there was “ an independent 
origin [for] the confession was  . . . necessary in order for the  
trial court to exercise its fact-finding prerogative in respect of 
the contention that the confession was tainted ”); State v. Pau u, 
72 Haw. 505, 511, 824 P.2d 833, 837 (1992) (holding that “[t]he 
State’s argument [was] not based on any evidence but is merely 
surmise and speculative inference,” such “that the State ha[d] 
failed to meet its burden of showing that the taint of the prior 
illegal search had been dissipated or that there was an 
independent source which induced [the defendant] to waive his 
constitutional rights”) .   In addition, the State did not  
sufficiently establish  an “independent origin” for Statement 3. 
See Kitashiro,  48 Haw. at 221 –22, 397 P.2d at  567–68 (holding that 
the confession was a fruit of the illegal search in part because 
the State failed to establish by substantial evidence that the 
confession had an independent source).  
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30

  
 
 
 
    
   
   
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The circuit court ’s determination that Statement 3 was 
not sufficiently attenuated from Statements 1 and 2 is also 
supported by the record and, hence, not clearly erroneous. 
Statement 3 was made within approximately three hours after 
Statements 1 and 2 and, contrary to the State’s assertion, the 
fact that Statement 3 was made in a different location does not demonstrate sufficient attenuation. Cf. id. at 218, 397 P.2d at 
566 (initial illegality and subsequent confession not sufficiently 
attenuated when, among other things, only three hours separated 
the two). 
The circuit court ’s further determination that there 
were no intervening circumstances that sufficiently attenuated 
Statement 3 from Statements 1 and 2 so as to purge the taint is 
also not clearly erroneous. As stated by the court, Lt. Rosa, who 
unlawfully elicited Statement 2 from Trinque, was with Trinque 
while he was transported to Līhue.  Additionally, Lt. Rosa and 
Officer Silva, the latter of whom was involved in the illegal 
procurement of Statement 1, were both present during the 
advisement of Miranda
 
rights that resulted in Trinque uttering 
Statement 3. Cf. Joseph , 109 Hawai i at 499, 128 P.3d at 812 
(holding that there was lack of attenuation between the illegal 
pre-interview and the post-interview partly because the post-
interview “was conducted by the same two detectives in the same 
interrogation room with no lapse in time between it and the pre -
31
  
 
 
 
   
 
                         
 
  
 
        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
interview”); Eli , 126 Hawai i at 524–25, 273 P.3d at 1210–11 
(holding that there was lack of attenuation because “[b]oth the 
pre-interview and post-Miranda interview were conducted by the 
same detective”). Given that Officer Silva was present when 
Trinque uttered Statement 1, and because Lt. Rosa was the officer  
who procured Statement 2, Trinque was not in a  neutral position to  
contradict or recant these earlier statements.   See  Kitashiro , 48 
Haw. at 218, 397 P.2d at 566 (explaining that the police used illegally seized evidence “to instill in defendant a realization 
of the hopelessness of his situation”); cf.  Pauu, 72 Haw. at 510, 
824 P.2d at 836 (reasoning that the defendant had no choice but to 
confess because the police already had the evidence to convict him 
after illegally searching the defendant’s bag and that, therefore, 
20  the confession was a fruit of the illegal search).  Also notable 
is the fact that Statement 3 was made without the benefit of counsel or after Trinque had an opportunity to speak with family 
or friends. See  Medeiros, 4 Haw. App. at 252-53, 665 P.2d at 184-
20 The State contends that the hopelessness that Trinque felt, which 
led to Statement 3, was the result of his being caught by the police officers 
in the marijuana patch and not at all related to the illegal conduct of Lt. Rosa and Officer Silva. However, this assertion as to the source of any 
hopelessness appears to be based on supposition. The circuit court rejected 
the State’s contentions concerning sufficient attenuation of Statement 3 from 
the taint of Statements 1 and 2, and, based on the evidence in the record, that 
finding is not clearly erroneous . Cf. Pauu, 72 Haw. at 511, 824 P.2d at 837 
(holding that arguments regarding the sufficient attenuation to dissipate the 
taint of a prior illegality must be supported by evidence). 
32
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
   
   
 
 
   
 
                         
 
   
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
85 (noting that the opportunity to speak with counsel or family or 
friends is a relevant consideration in determining taint). 
Contrary to the ICA’s reasoning and the State’s 
argument, the fact that Statements 1 and 2 were not referenced 
when Statement 3 was elicited is not sufficient to discharge the 
State’s burden of dem onstrating that Statement 3 was not a benefit 
gained by the police from Statements 1 or 2.  Although this court 
has held that express invocation of the product of an initial 
illegality in order to elicit a subsequent incriminating statement 
is sufficient to show that the subsequent statement is tainted, 
see, e.g., Eli , 126 Hawai i at 524, 273 P.3d at 1210, the fact that 
no reference is made to the product of the initial illegality does 
not establish that the subsequent statement is not tainted.21 If 
non-reference were sufficient to disprove taint, police officers could violate with impunity a defendant’s constitutional rights to 
obtain a confession.  For example, after obtaining a confession 
during a pre-Miranda custodial interrogation, police officers 
could apprise the defendant of his or her constitutional rights and then refrain from mentioning the previous confession so that 
all post-Miranda statements can be freely admitted into evidence.  
21 Further, as explained supra, Eli, Joseph, and Poaipuni essentially 
were cases in which the State failed to meet its burden of proving that the 
prior illegality did not contribute to the subsequent discovery of the 
challenged evidence. Those cases do not stand for the proposition that explicit reliance by the police on the prior illegality is a prerequisite to 
finding that the subsequently obtained evidence is a fruit of the poisonous 
tree. 
33
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
    
   
  
  
 
    
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
This outcome would render superfluous the fundamental guarantees 
of Miranda by the simple artifice of not mentioning the earlier, 
illegally obtained statement when eliciting the subsequent 
statement. 
While it is true that Statement 3 was elicited during 
Officer Silva’s advisement of Trinque’s Miranda rights, Miranda 
warnings, by themselves, are not enough to attenuate the taint of 
a prior illegality. Mariano, 114 Hawai i at 281, 160 P.3d at 1268.  
If “Miranda warnings . . . were held to attenuate the taint of an 
unconstitutional arrest, regardless of how wanton and purposeful 
the Fourth Amendment violation, the effect of the exclusionary 
rule would be substantially diluted.” Id. (quoting Brown, 422 
U.S. at 602); Joseph, 109 Hawai i at 487, 499, 128 P.3d at 800, 812 
(subsequent statement, made post-Miranda, was held to be a fruit 
of the poisonous tree); Eli, 126 Hawai i at 524, 273 P.3d at 1210 
(accord). Viewed another way, if Miranda warnings were sufficient 
to attenuate the taint of a prior illegality, then the warnings--
which were designed to safeguard certain constitutional rights--
would become a means to legitimize the violation of such rights. 
The State 
further contends that  State v. Luton,  83 
Hawaii 443, 927 P.2d 844 (1996), is controlling. In that case, 
this court held that the defendant’s subsequent con fession was not 
the fruit of his pre
-Miranda statements because the police 
34

  
 
 
 
  
   
    
  
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
 
                         
 
   
  
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
officers did not exploit an illegally obtained statement to elicit 
the defendant’s subsequent confession.22 Luton, 83 Hawai i at 455, 
927 P.2d at 856. However, Luton is entirely distinguishable from 
this case. First, the illegal statement and the post-Miranda 
statement in Luton were made one day apart, in contrast to a few 
hours in this case.  See id. at 447, 927 P.2d at 848.  Second, in 
Luton, the officers who elicited the post-Miranda confession were 
different from the one who obtained the illegal pre-Miranda statement. Id. Here, on the other hand, the same police officers 
involved in illegally obtaining Statement 1 and Statement 2 were present in the interrogation room when Statement 3 was made, and 
Officer Silva was the one 
who was advising Trinque of his 
constitutional rights when Statement 3 was made.  Third, and most 
significantly, the defendant in Luton met with a public defender, 
between the taking of the unlawful statement and the subsequent 
statement, and the public defender “advised [Luton] not to say 
anything to anyone, including the police
.” Id.  Nevertheless, the 
defendant elected to speak to the police
. Id. at 446, 927 P.2d at 
847. Luton 
thus involved intervening circumstances--not present 
22 Luton also noted the fact that the police did not use the pre -
Miranda statements to induce a confession and did not reference the pre -Miranda 
statements during the post -Miranda interrogation. Luton, 83 Hawai i at 455, 927 
P.2d at 856. As discussed supra, the fact that the police in this case did not 
mention or reference Statements 1 and 2 when Trinque made Statement 3 and that 
Miranda warnings were provided before Statement 3 was made does not suffice to 
satisfy the State’s burden of proving that Statement 3 is not a fruit of 
Statements 1 and 2. 
35
  
 
 
 
   
 
  Accordingly,  pursuant to article I, section 10 of the 
Hawaii Constitution,   the State   failed to meet its burden of 
demonstrating that Statements 1 and 2 did not taint Statement 3  or 
that Statement 3 was  so attenuated from Statements 1 and 2 as to 
purge the taint  for the following reasons: (1) the State failed to 
show that Statement 3  would still have been elicited  had the 
illegality that produced Statements 1 and 2   not occurred; (2) the  
fact that neither Statement 1 nor Statement 2 was explicitly 
referenced in the course of eliciting Statement 3  does not satisfy 
the State’s burden of demonstrating that Statement 3 is untainted;  
(3) there were no intervening circumstances  to indicate that the 
taint of Statements 1 and 2 had dissipated when Statement 3 was 
made; (4) the   lapse of time and change in location are inadequate 
to demonstrate sufficient attenuation between Statements 1 and 2 and Statement 3; and (5) under the circumstances of this case, 
advising Trinque of his constitutional rights did not attenuate 
Statement 3 from the prior illegality  in obtaining Statements 1 
and 2. Thus, Statement 3 was the fruit of Statement  s 1 and 2  and 
 inadmissible into  evidence.  
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
in this case--that purged the taint. In light of these facts, 
Luton is inapposite. 
V. CONCLUSION 
We hold that Statement 2 is inadmissible into evidence 
because it was the product of 
pre-Miranda custodial interrogation 
36

  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
and that Statement 3 is the fruit of Statements 1 and 2. 
Accordingly, the circuit court’s rulings as to Statements 2 and 3 
were not clearly erroneous. For these reasons, we vacate the 
ICA’s Judgment on Appeal; affirm t he circuit court’s Order 
Suppressing Statements and Order Denying Voluntariness of Statements; and remand this case to the circuit court for further 
proceedings. 
Jon N. Ikenaga and  
Hayley Y.C. Cheng  
for petitioner  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
Justin F. Kollar and  
Tracy Murakami  
for respondent  /s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
/s/ Gary W.B. Chang 
37
 