                                                                 
  
      
          
          
          
          ***  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S   HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER  *** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-16-0000004 17-DEC-2019 08:22 AM 
IN  THE  SUPREME  COURT  OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
---o0o---
STATE
  OF  HAWAI I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs. 
MICHAEL
  LIMJUCO  ABELLA, 
Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant. 
SCWC-16-0000004 
CERTIORARI   TO  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
(CAAP-16-0000004;  CR.  NO.  14-1-1253) 
DECEMBER  17,  2019 
RECKTENWALD,  C.J.,  NAKAYAMA,  McKENNA,  POLLACK,  AND  WILSON,  JJ. 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  RECKTENWALD,  C.J. 
This case requires
 us to determine whether a defendant 
may be convicted of homicide if the victim’s death was the 
immediate result of a choice by the victim’s family to withdraw 
medical care. Michael Limjuco Abella was charged with Murder in 
the Second Degree after severely beating Shelton Higa on July 17,           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
           
        
             
           
          
           
        
      
       
           
       
        
          
         
         
           
          
         
       
  
       
            
         
          
        
        2014. Higa was comatose for more than a week thereafter; medical 
professionals estimated that his chances of survival were slim, 
and if he did survive, his quality of life would likely be poor. 
He was removed from life support and declared dead on July 29, 
2014, twelve days after the altercation. In the Circuit Court 
for the First Circuit, a jury found Abella guilty of the lesser-
included offense of Manslaughter. The Intermediate Court of 
Appeals (ICA) affirmed the conviction. 
Abella argues that a defendant in these circumstances 
cannot be charged and convicted of a homicide due to a provision 
in the Uniform Health-Care Decisions Act that prohibits 
designating as a homicide any “[d]eath resulting from the 
withholding or withdrawal of health care” under the Act. Hawai i 
Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 327E-13(b) (2010). Abella asserts that 
the plain language of the statute shields him from conviction 
under these circumstances. We disagree. Viewing the Act as a 
whole and given the historical context that led to its passage, 
it is clear that the legislature intended to protect medical 
professionals and family members making difficult choices, not 
actors like Abella. 
However, we nonetheless vacate the judgment on appeal 
and remand this case for a new trial. Abella argues, and we 
agree, that the jury should have been given instructions on 
causation pursuant to HRS §§ 702-215 (2014) and 702-216 (2014). 
Those instructions would have enabled the jury to consider 
whether the intervening volitional conduct of the family and 
2           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  I. BACKGROUND 
  A. Circuit Court Procecedings 
  
      
     
       
           
         
     
        
             
             
            
    medical  team  interrupted  the  chain  of  causation  between  Abella’s 
actions  and  Higa’s  death  such  that  it  would  be  unfair  or  unjust 
to  hold  him  criminally  culpable  for  homicide.   While  we  recognize 
without  qualification  that  the  decision  to  remove  a  loved  one 
from  life  support  is  difficult  and  serious,  and  the  law  protects 
that  choice,  nevertheless,  the  issues  of  causation  raised  in  this 
case  must  be  decided  by  a  jury.   Consequently,  we  hold  that  it 
was  plain  error  for  the  circuit  court  to  fail  to  instruct  the 
jury  on  causation  and  culpability  pursuant  to  HRS  §§  702-215  and 
702-216.  
Abella  was  charged   by  indictment  in  the  Circuit  Court 
of  the  First  Circuit  with  Murder  in  the  Second  Degree  in 
violation  of  HRS  §  707-701.5  (2014).   His  jury   trial  began  on 
September  21,  2015.2 1 
1. Witness’ Testimony 
The following testimony was adduced at trial. 
a. Events of July 17, 2014 
Witnesses Ronald Landrio and Donald King each testified 
that on July 17, 2014, at approximately 8:45 p.m., they were at 
the intersection of Smith and Pauahi Streets in Honolulu when 
1 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided. 
2 As relevant to Abella’s prosecutorial misconduct claim, which we 
decline to reach, see infra note 9, Abella filed a pre-trial motion in limine 
requesting a number of things. At the hearing for the motion, State agreed 
not to “comment upon [Abella’s] assertion of his right to remain silent prior 
to, or during, trial[.]” 
3           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
            
           
 
        
           
           
        
             
           
           
         
              
        
             
   
        
         
         
          
             
          
         
         
   
       
         they heard the sound of a glass bottle breaking. Each looked in 
the direction of the sound and saw Shelton Higa fall to the 
ground. 
Landrio further testified that after Higa fell to the 
ground, a man stood over Higa and began punching him. King 
testified that after Higa fell to the ground, a man, whom he 
identified as Abella, began “very violently” kicking Higa several 
times, “trying to strike his head as much as he can.” As Higa 
was on the ground, King noticed that Higa was “holding his head” 
and “trying to protect himself.” King testified that he saw Higa 
getting struck “[i]n the head, in the shoulders, and arms, 
because . . . [Higa was] trying to cover his face and his head.” 
Landrio testified that while the man was punching Higa, 
a group of people went over and stopped the man. The man then 
left the area. 
An ambulance and police officers arrived at the scene 
at 9:04 pm. Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Celestino 
Herana testified that he was dispatched to Smith and Pauahi 
Streets on an assault call at approximately 8:54 p.m. and met 
Higa. Higa was holding the right side of his head, which was red 
and swelling. Officer Herana detected a slight odor of alcohol 
emanating from Higa’s breath, but Higa was coherent. Officer 
Herana took photographs of the scene, had Higa fill out 
paperwork, and left. 
Kell Tanabe, Jr., then a paramedic-in-training for the 
City and County of Honolulu, testified to examining Higa and 
4           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
          
           
  
       
              
            
            
           
 
         
         
          
          
           
           
  
        
               
            
             
     
       
            
              
      witnessing superficial lacerations to the right side of his face 
and a hematoma3 to his right temple. Tanabe testified that 
Higa’s vital signs were stable and that Higa refused a ride to 
the hospital. 
Antoinette Tuituu testified that she saw the ambulance 
leave, and she went over to talk to Higa. She said that Higa was 
sitting at first, and then he got on his hands and knees, trying 
to stand up and return to the ambulance. She recounted that Higa 
said he felt dizzy, and he asked Tuituu to call the ambulance 
again. 
Tuituu continued that as Higa was on his hands and 
knees, “[t]hat guy came ([pointing to Abella in the courtroom]) 
and starting hitting him just out of the blue[.]” Tuituu 
testified that Abella “was wild” and hitting Higa on the head 
with both hands. After seeing Higa get hit about “five, six 
times,” Tuituu ran to the police station about a block away to 
get help. 
King testified that he saw Abella kicking Higa “more 
than several . . . maybe up to 14 or 20” times. He said that 
Higa was attempting to get away, but since there was a wall in 
front of him, it was “like he’s trying to crawl into the wall to 
get away from this guy.” 
Landrio testified that he intervened after seeing “the 
3 A hematoma is “a mass of usually clotted blood that forms in a 
tissue, organ, or body space as a result of a broken blood vessel.” Merriam-
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 579 (11th ed. 2009). 
5           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
           
     
        
          
        
            
           
             
          
         
             
       
           
         
           
           
  
  
      
         
           
           
          
             
           same figure[,]” whom he identified as Abella, “beating on [Higa] 
again.” Landrio noted that Higa was not fighting back during the 
incident because of his poor health. 
Landrio “came up behind [Abella] and grabbed him to 
stop him from hitting [Higa] again.” Landrio and Abella then 
started punching each other, causing Landrio’s glasses to go 
“flying” off of his face, and for Landrio to have a bloody nose 
and hurt shoulder. Landrio testified: “I managed to get a couple 
of shots in. He was hitting pretty good, so I jumped off into 
the street on Smith Street again, just to regroup myself.” 
According to Landrio, Abella then walked back toward Higa, hit 
him a few more times, and “just walked off down Pauahi Street.” 
Tuituu testified that after she returned from the 
police station to call for help, she saw Abella walking away. 
Tuituu and King both testified that they began following Abella 
until they caught up with him. At approximately 9:42 p.m., 
Officer Herana responded to the same area on an assault call and 
arrested Abella. 
b. Abella’s Testimony 
During the defense’s case-in-chief, Abella took the 
stand, advancing a theory of self-defense. Abella testified that 
on July 17, 2014, at around 8:45 p.m., he was present in 
Chinatown near Smith and Pauahi. He testified that he was “just 
hanging around” with other people, and around that time, he saw 
an ambulance and police lights. He said that he did not go to 
check it out, but instead walked over to the River of Life 
6           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
            
            
          
            
            
 
       
             
              
         
          
          
             
               
          
             
         
   
   
    
         
          
        
           
            
            
         
           
             Mission to see what food would be served. He testified that Higa 
came up to him and instigated the fight; per Abella, “he just hit 
me.” After that, Abella claimed that another person jumped in 
the fray, and he just blocked hits until he left. He further 
claimed that he did not know Higa nor know why Higa would hit 
him. 
Abella identified Higa in a photograph and acknowledged 
that Higa was older than him, but said, “he was quicker. He hit 
me quick. He hit me twice in my jaw.” In response to the 
State’s questions, Abella acknowledged that he did not have time 
to react to the second punch, but thereafter, Abella reacted by 
hitting Higa, and did not stop hitting Higa until Landrio broke 
it up (“He jump in, too, yes.”) Abella said that he and Landrio 
exchanged punches a “little bit . . . . But I - I fled after 
that.” Abella said that after he finished fighting with Landrio, 
he walked over by the Fort Street Mall and was stopped by police. 
On cross-examination, Abella said he thought he (Abella) has “a 
pretty good punch[.]”4 
c. Higa’s Medical Care 
Ashley Hashimoto, then a paramedic-in-training, 
testified that at approximately 9:52 p.m., she responded to an 
assault call at Smith Street in Chinatown, and when she arrived, 
4 As relevant to the prosecutorial misconduct claim, on cross-
examination, the State asked Abella whether he reported to the police “that 
this 57-year-old man had thrown two punches so fast that you couldn’t respond 
in time[.]” Thereafter, the defense moved for a mistrial, arguing that this 
line of questioning commented impermissibly on Abella’s right to remain 
silent. The State immediately withdrew the questions, and the court ordered 
the jury to disregard. The court denied the motion for a mistrial. 
7           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
           
           
          
         
         
          
         
       
          
          
        
 
         
              
          
     
         
          
             
            
            
          
         
          
      
     she saw Higa lying on his back, rolling around, and screaming. 
Higa was able to provide his name and date to the responding 
medical team, but could not answer any other questions and was 
“yelling and screaming and rolling.” The responding medical team 
placed Higa in “full spinal mobilization,” started an IV, took 
his vital signs, and transported him to Queen’s Medical Center. 
Higa was taken to Queen’s, a trauma center, for a 
possible brain injury and multiple contusions. Hashimoto 
testified that there are a range of symptoms that could indicate 
a brain injury, some of which Higa exhibited: Higa was “altered”; 
“very combative and agitated”; and had “significantly high” blood 
pressure. 
At Queen’s, Higa was seen by the emergency room doctor 
and was sent for a CT scan of his brain. Higa was given a 
sedative before undergoing the CT scan. He fell unconscious and 
did not regain consciousness thereafter. 
Dr. Susan Steinemann, a surgeon who was qualified as an 
expert in trauma and general surgery, testified that she saw Higa 
after his CT scan. By the time Dr. Steinemann saw Higa, he was 
“comatose” and “would not open his eyes. He was not able to 
vocalize. And he had only some minimal movements of his arm and 
leg.” In grading the degree of his coma, Dr. Steinemann 
explained that a score of three “would be someone that’s 
basically dead” and a score of fifteen “is normal.” Dr. 
Steinemann scored Higa as a five. 
On cross-examination, defense counsel asked Dr. 
8           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
           
             
          
         
         
            
        
       
          
           
          
      
          
          
          
  
      
         
        
         
          
         
        
             
       Steinemann about Higa’s sedation prior to his CT scan, suggesting 
that Higa was verbal when he was first admitted to the emergency 
room and that he was sedated prior to his CT scan because he was 
agitated. Dr. Steinemann testified that she did not review the 
record regarding Higa’s state when he was first admitted, but 
agreed that, in general, an agitated patient may be administered 
a sedative prior to a CT scan, as “[t]he quality of the scan 
would be poor if the patient were moving.”5 
Dr. Steinemann testified that the type of sedation 
given to Higa “go[es] away in a fairly predictable period of 
time.” She said, “We don’t generally sedate people to the point 
of unconsciousness” prior to a CT scan. She acknowledged that 
for surgeries, “[o]nce they’re under anesthesia, they’re 
unconscious.” Regarding Higa’s state after his CT scan and prior 
to surgery, defense counsel asked “And he was not conscious at 
that time; isn’t that correct?” Dr. Steinemann replied, “No, he 
was comatose.” 
On direct examination, Dr. Steinemann testified that 
Higa was comatose “[b]ecause of his severe brain injury” (a 
“large subdural hematoma” or, in other words, “bleeding inside 
the skull[.]”). A subdural hematoma is dangerous because, as 
“the blood clot enlarges, it puts pressure on the brain and 
squashes the brain down[.]” So, “[a] brainstem herniation is 
5 Dr. Eric Oshiro similarly testified that in most circumstances, 
prior to a CT scan, “a short-acting sedative” is used, and is expected to 
“wear[ ] off” after the CT scan. 
9           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
        
       
         
          
       
        
         
        
 
         
         
          
         
         
           
      
          
            
             
      
        
              
         
         
         often the response to significant subdural hematoma.” 
When asked to describe how a subdural hematoma and 
brainstem herniation relate to being comatose, Dr. Steinemann 
explained that “the subdural hematoma, where it is located, will 
tend to affect more of the higher brain functions, the thinking, 
the ability to control movements[,]” while “[t]he brainstem 
controls those very basic life responses, breathing and heart 
rate.” She explained that “the brainstem herniation is usually 
the last thing to happen before somebody’s considered brain 
dead.” 
When asked to describe the size of the bleeding based 
on Higa’s CT scan, Dr. Steinemann testified that it was 
“[d]eadly. If he didn’t have emergency surgery, deadly. And 
even with emergency surgery, high – high mortality would be 
expected.” She testified that “[t]he prognosis even with surgery 
for a bleed of this type is – is not good.” 
Higa’s neurosurgeon, Dr. Oshiro, testified about the 
craniotomy procedure he performed on Higa and the blood clot he 
saw inside Higa’s skull. Dr. Oshiro testified that Higa was in a 
coma when Dr. Oshiro met him, and he was on a ventilator prior to 
the surgery and after the surgery. 
Dr. Oshiro said that Higa’s CT scan “confirmed that 
there was a large blood clot on the surface of the brain . . . 
that was compressing the brain.” He testified that from 
reviewing Higa’s presenting exam and his CT scan, Higa’s blood 
clot was “a life-threatening situation.” He noted that while 
10           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
            
            
       
        
         
           
       
        
          
           
            
         
            
         
           
             
            
           
           
        
            
       
         
          
          “not all” blood clots on the brain are life-threatening, Higa’s 
was. He drew this conclusion based on “[t]he size” of the clot 
as well as “the fact that on clinical exam, he had a dilated 
pupil, which is indication of brainstem compression.” 
Dr. Oshiro testified that external injuries, such as a 
skull fracture, are not necessarily indicative of a serious brain 
injury. He testified that this kind of bleeding “is a direct 
result of the acceleration/deceleration injury to the brain,” 
which he explained “can occur without actually cracking the 
skull” and “without having a noticeable outward sign of injury.” 
Dr. Oshiro stated that this kind of injury can occur from trauma, 
such as “[s]ome sort of impact, blow to the head.” He testified 
that Higa’s hematoma could be created by “somebody str[iking] him 
on the right side of the skull with a 40-ounce beer bottle, which 
cracked the glass” due to an occurrence called a “contracoup 
injury.” Because there is space inside the skull for the brain 
to move, if the skull is hit on one side, the impact can cause 
the brain to “bounce[ ]” and “hit[ ] the other side” of the 
skull. He explained that in this regard, the location of the 
hematoma in relation to the location of the impact is “not that 
predictable.” Dr. Steinemann also testified that Higa’s injury 
would be consistent with being punched or kicked in the head. 
Dr. Oshiro testified that the craniotomy procedure had 
“satisfactory results as far as removing the blood clot and 
reducing the pressure on the brain.” He observed Higa’s brain 
surface turn from “very tense” to having “a normal pulsation that 
11           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
          
          
    
         
          
             
          
          
     
       
           
         
            
     
          
          
          
           
         
          
            
           
         
 
        
           curves with the heartbeat,” and he saw that Higa’s dilated pupil 
on the left side “came back down” after the surgery. 
“[U]nfortunately,” however, a successful procedure 
“does not guarantee a full recovery” because “sometimes you can’t 
tell before doing the surgery how much damage is done already, 
how much damage is permanent, [or] how much can be . . . improved 
by reducing the pressure.” According to Dr. Oshiro, “[i]n other 
words, there may be some permanent injury to the brain already 
done that cannot be reversed.” 
After the craniotomy, Dr. Oshiro examined Higa every 
day. He noticed that “[t]here was very slight improvement. His 
pupils were reactive to light; that is, they reacted normally 
when you shine a light. Normal reaction is they constrict. But 
he never fully regained consciousness.” 
From July 20 to July 28, 2014, notes in Higa’s medical 
record provided as follows. On July 20, a note indicated 
“minimal change” in Higa’s neurological exam. On July 21, Higa 
had a “slight eye opening,” which, in comparison to where he was 
before, indicated “a slight bit of consciousness.” Higa also 
reacted to a sternum rub, which is “an irritating kind of 
maneuver” used “to get a reaction” from a patient. A July 22 
note stated that “his eyes open briefly, and he blinks to threat 
and tracks a little,” thus “show[ing] a slight improvement in 
consciousness.” 
On July 25, Higa likewise showed a “slight improvement 
in the neurologic exam” compared to the previous day. He was 
12           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
           
           
          
        
         
         
         
          
         
         
   
        
        
           
         
          
         
          
    
        
         
        
         
          
           “clearly localizing with left arm,” meaning that when he was 
given a sternum rub, he was able “to localize where the stimulus 
is coming from and actually reach toward it[,]” as opposed to an 
“abnormal response,” which would be “no movement at all” after a 
sternum rub. This, again, showed “little gradations of 
consciousness” and was “somewhat of an improvement[.]” On July 
26, Higa showed “a slight improvement in eye opening.” 
On July 27, Higa was “more alert” and “improving levels 
of alertness with sustained eye opening[.]” On July 28, Higa’s 
“eyes open to voice,” thus indicating “a slight improvement in 
consciousness.” He had a “stable neurologic exam,” meaning “that 
it’s not worsening.” 
When asked whether Higa “was ever going to regain 
independent breathing[,]” Dr. Oshiro testified that there was a 
“less than 50/50” chance. He opined that while it was “probably 
possible” for Higa to regain independent breathing, it was “not 
more likely than not.” Dr. Steinemann testified that based on 
the significance of Higa’s brain injury, if care were not 
withdrawn, she “would expect that his prognosis would be poor for 
return to independent living.” 
With respect to taking a patient off life support, 
Dr. Steinemann explained that the decision “is usually made in 
consultation with the family based upon the patient’s previously 
expressed wishes about quality of life.” Dr. Oshiro testified 
that he does not recall whether he was “physically present” when 
Higa’s breathing tube was removed. He did not state whether he 
13           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
          
        
   
       
         
          
          
       
       
            
         
        
         
 
          
           
          
         
   
           
         
        
       
           
            
          
         was aware that Higa’s improvements were or were not communicated 
to Higa’s next of kin, and noted that “these decisions are 
primarily made by the intensive care physician” or “the 
neurointensive care physician.” 
On July 27, Higa’s daughter and next-of-kin (Daughter) 
was notified about her father’s presence at the hospital, where 
she worked as a registered nurse. Daughter had an “estranged 
relationship” with her father, but she was aware of his kidney 
problems and that he was “going blind.” 
Daughter testified that after a social worker called 
and found her, she spoke with an “ICU doctor” named Dr. Chang who 
told her about Higa’s present condition and presented her with 
the decision to take Higa off life support. 
Daughter said she decided to take her father off life 
support because: 
[DAUGHTER:] I knew what he -- we had talked about that 
before when my grandmother was on life support and we had to 
make that decision. And I’ve seen what happens when you 
leave people on life support who -- and the doctors' 
prognosis. 
[STATE]: Which was what? 
A. That he wasn't going to have any kind of a meaningful 
recovery, and he’d probably be hooked up to the ventilator 
and wouldn’t be able to regain an independent lifestyle. 
Daughter testified that she was informed about Higa’s 
condition over the previous ten days in which he was under the 
care of Dr. Steinemann and Dr. Oshiro. She said that she was 
provided “a summary of what happened in the surgery and his 
current condition[,]” but she was not notified “as to the 
14           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
          
         
               
             
           
           
             
            
              
             
          
           
    
           
           
              
             
            
 
         
          
          improvement  in  his  condition  regarding  his  neural  exams 
throughout  the  ten  days[.]”   She  testified  that,  as  a  nurse,  she 
has  seen  people  in  a  condition  like  her  father’s.   She  said  that 
she  has  never  seen  other  people  in  such  a  condition  regain  or 
even  “somewhat  regain”  their  faculties.  
d. Higa’s Death 
Higa  was  pronounced  dead  on  July  29,   2014,  after  his 
breathing  tube  was  removed.  
Dr.  Oshiro  opined  that  the  sedation   administered  prior 
to  the  CT  scan  did  not  kill  Higa.   Dr.  Oshiro  also  testified  that 
while  Higa  had  end-stage  renal  disease,  which  complicated  his 
recovery,  the  renal  disease  did  not  cause  Higa’s  death.   Dr. 
Oshiro  testified  that  the  subdural  hematoma  caused  Higa’s  death.  6 
The  following  exchange  took  place  between  defense 
counsel   and  Dr.  Oshiro  on  recross-examination: 
[DEFENSE  COUNSEL:] . . . . in this case, there was slight 
6 Higa’s end-stage renal disease meant that he could not survive 
unless he was on dialysis. Dr. Oshiro did not know the last time Higa had 
dialysis, but testified that he could “take a guess” that “it hadn’t been very 
recent” based on Higa’s blood test. Dr. Oshiro explained that Higa’s 
“creatinine and his BUN [blood urea nitrogen] were markedly elevated as well 
as his potassium in his blood.” When asked to explain the blood interaction 
with the body’s organs, Dr. Oshiro stated that the answer was “very complex” 
and “beyond the scope of what I can answer.” However, he provided an example 
that “potassium being high could make him go into a bad heart rhythm, which 
would be fatal.” He also suggested that “electrolyte abnormalities” could 
cause fluid accumulation in the lungs that “may create a problem with 
oxygenation from the lungs.” 
When asked how the quality of the blood might affect the brain, 
Dr. Oshiro noted that “the blood clotting is probably not completely normal,” 
meaning “that it probably takes a little bit longer for the blood to clot than 
it normally would.” Dr. Oshiro also noted that “the brain doesn’t function as 
well as it normally should” when blood is not processed through dialysis when 
necessary. 
Dr. Christopher Happy, the medical examiner, was asked whether the 
end-stage renal disease contributed to Higa’s condition, to which Dr. Happy 
responded: “to his overall health, sure, but not his death.” 
15           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
    
 
         
            
           
 
            
          
         
          
         
 
 
             
   
   
        
          
          
       
          
           
           
          
                      
          
         
          
           im
provement happening on a day-to-day basis; right? 
[DR.  OSHIRO:] Yes. 
Q. And there’s no telling where that improvement was going 
to stop at that point when -- I mean, in two weeks’ time 
that you had him under your care, Mr. Higa; is that right? 
A. Correct. 
Q. And you said just before we took a recess that the cause 
of death was the subdural hematoma, but you really -- that’s 
not really accurate, because isn’t it true that Mr. Higa 
could well have survived a little longer than the two weeks 
without them pulling the tubes and pulling the plug? Isn't 
that right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. I mean, he wasn’t at a stage where he was going to die 
right then and there? 
A. That is correct. 
On July 30, 2014, Dr. Christopher Happy, the chief 
medical examiner for the City and County, performed an autopsy on 
Higa. Dr. Happy concluded that Higa’s death was caused by 
“[c]omplications from blunt force head injury with subdural 
hemorrhage.” He read Higa’s medical records and could see during 
the autopsy that Higa had a prior surgery to remove the blood 
from around his brain. He explained that when there is bleeding 
around the brain, it creates pressure in a finite space and 
begins to push the brain downward “through the large hole at the 
bottom of the skull.” He explained that “the first thing that 
goes through that hole is the brainstem[,]” which is “where the 
blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate are controlled.” 
He testified that when it is pushed down, the brainstem is 
impinged, “[a]nd so the heart will stop, breathing will stop.” 
16           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
            
          
         
          
          
     
       
          
         
          
  
     
        
          
           
         
          
           
              
    
        
         
        
         
         
   
         
      Dr. Happy testified that the brain injury Higa received 
“in you or me or anybody healthy would cause death.” He further 
explained that a toxicology report was conducted. He said that 
the report indicated “some morphine, which was given in the 
hospital for pain control,” as well as “acetone, which is a 
ketone, which is sometimes formed after a prolonged period of a 
person being essentially brain dead.” 
On cross-examination, Dr. Happy testified that he was 
not aware that, after Higa’s craniotomy, he was “improving in his 
alertness[.]” However, he testified that this fact would not 
have made a difference in his final report regarding Higa’s cause 
of death. 
2. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal 
After the close of the State’s evidence, the defense 
made an oral motion for judgment of acquittal. Defense counsel 
asked the court to grant the motion based on HRS § 327E-13(b),7 
arguing that the statute provides a basis for dismissing the 
murder charge, as well as “other lesser charges” that cover the 
death of a person. He contended that “we could continue the 
trial on the basis of an assault in the second degree or less.” 
7 HRS § 327E-13(b) provides: 
Death resulting from the withholding or withdrawal of health 
care in accordance with this chapter shall not for any 
purpose constitute a suicide or homicide or legally impair 
or invalidate a policy of insurance or an annuity providing 
a death benefit, notwithstanding any term of the policy or 
annuity to the contrary. 
Although the legislature amended HRS § 327E-13 in 2018, subsequent 
to Abella’s trial, subsection (b) remains unchanged. 
17           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
        
        
            
            
 
       
          
          
          
          
        
          
           
         
            
      
         
          
          
          
          
     
         
        
         
        
        
         
     In response, the State argued that HRS Chapter 327E 
should not absolve criminal defendants from penal liability under 
these circumstances. The State argued: “[HRS §] 327E-13(b) 
applies, and it applies to [Daughter] in this case. It does not 
apply to the defendant. To do so would lead to an absurd 
result.” 
In rebuttal, defense counsel focused on “the plain 
language of the statute,” and argued that “the standard that the 
legislature has put on this type of case” means “that nobody’s 
going to be held responsible for homicide if someone else pulls 
the plug.” The court asked him whether anything in the 
legislative history supported his argument, to which he replied: 
Well, I did not go into the legislative intent of this 
statute. However, when the -- when they say, shall not for 
any purpose constitute a homicide, they know what a homicide 
is. It’s not a surprise to them, that murder is a homicide, 
involves homicide. Manslaughter involves homicide. Assault 
in the first degree involves potentially a homicide. So it’s 
not a surprise to the legislature that those types of cases 
are happening under -- under the framework of homicide. So, 
you know, it’s in the plain language of this statute, you 
know, so I would assume that the legislature knew what it 
was doing when it did this. 
The court denied the motion. The court determined that 
the statute’s “reference that death from withholding medical care 
would not constitute a homicide or suicide appears to protect 
healthcare providers and the decision-makers,” as well as “the 
beneficiaries of the decedent[.]” It reasoned that defense 
counsel’s reading of the statute “would produce absurd results in 
situations similar to” this case. 
18           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
       
        
      
            
         
          
         
          
          
   
          
         
          
      
           
        
        
          
          
         
           
      
        
          
           
   
        
         
         3. Jury Instructions 
The parties agreed to the court’s general jury 
instructions and reviewed the court’s supplemental instructions. 
Supplemental instruction “T” provided: “Conduct is the 
cause of a result when it is an antecedent but for which the 
result in question would not have occurred.” The defense 
objected to this instruction and argued, “I think it confuses -
this instruction is more confusing than anything. It’s not 
necessary. It’s duplicative of what’s going on in the [c]ourt’s 
general instructions.” The State, on the other hand, argued that 
the instruction was necessary 
in light of the fact that it was the defendant’s conduct 
that caused the subdural bleed which put him in respiratory 
distress which caused him to be put on the ventilator and 
lose consciousness, which ultimately resulted in the 
decision by his daughter to take him off life support. So 
all of these events stem from the defendant’s conduct. 
In other words, but for the defendant’s conduct, none 
of the - the operation or the treatment at Queen’s or 
lifesaving decision would have occurred. So in light of the 
facts of this case, this is an applicable and relevant 
statement of the law to help the jury explain - help the 
jury. 
The court included the instruction over defense’s 
objection, noting that the instruction came verbatim from HRS 
§ 702-214 (2014). Defense counsel did not request an instruction 
on causation pursuant to HRS §§ 702-215 and -216, and the court 
did not provide one. 
Ultimately, the jury was instructed with regard to the 
offenses of Murder in the Second Degree, Manslaughter based upon 
reckless conduct, Assault in the First Degree, Assault in the 
19           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
  
            
         
        
  
        
 
   Second  Degree  (Substantial  Bodily  Injury),  Assault  in  the  Second 
Degree  (Serious  Bodily  Injury),  Assault  in  the  Third  Degree,  and 
Reckless  Endangering  in  the  Second  Degree.   The  jury  was  also 
instructed  as  to  self-defense,  deadly  force,  causation,  and  the 
relevant  states  of  mind.   The  Manslaughter  instruction  read: 
If  and  only  if  you  find  the  Defendant  not  guilty  of 
Murder  in  the  Second  Degree  or  you  are  unable  to  reach  a 
unanimous  verdict  as  to  this  offense,  then  you  must  consider 
whether  the  Defendant  is  guilty  or  not  guilty  of  the 
included  offense  of  Manslaughter  based  upon  reckless 
conduct.  
A  person  commits  the  offense  of  Manslaughter  based 
upon  reckless  conduct  if  he  recklessly  causes  the  death  of 
another  person.   
There  are  two  material  elements  of  this  offense,  each 
of  which  the  Prosecution  must  prove  beyond  a  reasonable 
doubt.  
These two elements are: 
1. That on or about July 17, 2014, to and including 
July 29, 2014, in the City and County of Honolulu, 
State of Hawaii, the Defendant caused the death of 
Shelton Higa; and 
2. That the Defendant did so recklessly. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Consistent  with  its  ruling  as  to  instruction  “T,”  the 
court  instructed  the  jury  on  causation  as  follows:  “Conduct  is 
the  cause  of  a  result  when  it  is  an  antecedent  but  for  which  the 
result  in  question  would  not  have  occurred.”  
4. Verdict
 and Sentence 
The  jury   returned  a  verdict  finding  Abella  guilty  of 
Manslaughter  pursuant  to  HRS  §  707-702  (2014).   The  circuit  court 
subsequently  sentenced  Abella  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  for 
twenty  years.   Abella  timely  filed  a  notice  of  appeal.  
20           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
        
           
        
         
           
          
         
        
  
       
         
          
           
              
           
        
         
           
         
          
       
          
             
               
    B. ICA Proceedings 
On  appeal,  Abella  argued  that  the  circuit  court  plainly 
erred  by  failing  to  instruct  the  jury  regarding  the  causal 
connection,  or  lack  thereof,  between  Abella’s  conduct  and  Higa’s 
death.   He  also  claimed  that  the  circuit  court  erred  by  failing 
to  apply  HRS  §  327E-13  to  his  case.   Accordingly,  Abella  asked 
that  the  ICA  reverse  the  circuit  court’s  judgment  and  dismiss  his 
case. 8
Abella argued that the circuit court plainly
 erred when 
it failed to instruct the jury, sua sponte, on the issue of 
causation between Abella’s conduct and Higa’s death, and that 
this failure was prejudicial. Abella contended that his conduct 
could not have caused Higa’s death, in light of the twelve days 
that passed between the confrontation at issue and his death, and 
the intervening acts by numerous persons within that time frame, 
“i.e., medical treatment, and a decision made that terminated 
Higa’s life.” 
In light of these circumstances, Abella argued that 
Higa’s death was “too remote” or “too dependent on another’s 
8 Abella also argued that the circuit court should have ordered a 
mistrial in light of the prosecutor’s attempts to elicit testimony from Abella 
about why he did not report his interactions with Higa to the police. See 
supra note 4. Abella argued that the prosecutor’s line of questioning 
encroached upon Abella’s constitutional right to remain silent. 
The ICA did not credit this argument, determining that the 
prosecutor’s actions did not amount to misconduct, and even if the questioning 
was improper, the circuit court’s subsequent instructions to the jury 
constituted a “prompt curative instruction.” State v. Abella, 144 Hawaii  
141, 1
52, 438 P.3d 273, 284 (App. 2019). 
Abella raises this issue again in his application for writ of 
certiorari. Because, as discussed infra, we decide this case on the basis of 
the jury instructions and remand for a new trial as a result, we need not and 
do not reach this issue. 
21           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
           
          
      
    
        
           
       
            
         
           
         
     
         
       
      
        
           
         
        
         
         
 
    
      volitional conduct” to assign responsibility to Abella for Higa’s 
actual death. As such, Abella argued that the instructions as a 
whole, which did not include a causation instruction based on HRS 
§§ 702-2159 and -21610 , were “prejudicially insufficient, 
erroneous, inconsistent, and misleading.” 
Abella also argued that the circuit court erred by 
failing to apply HRS § 327E-13 to his case when its plain 
language prohibited his conviction. Abella explained that, 
pursuant to HRS § 327E-13, a “[d]eath resulting from the . . . 
withdrawal of health care in accordance with [Chapter 327E] shall 
not for any purpose constitute a . . . homicide,” and that 
further, under Chapter 327E, “death” occurs “when a person has 
experienced [the] irreversible cessation of spontaneous 
respiratory and circulatory functions” and “at the time when the 
irreversible cessation of the functions first coincide.” 
Applying Chapter 327E, Abella contended that Higa’s 
death necessarily occurred when his ventilator was removed, and 
could not have occurred before that time. Abella pointed to Dr. 
Oshiro’s testimony that “Higa had a 50% possibility of regaining 
independent breathing,” that “there was no telling where that 
improvement was going to stop,” and that “Higa could have 
survived longer than he did” had his ventilator not been 
withdrawn. 
9 For  the  text  of  HRS  §  702-215,  see  infra  note  12. 
10 For the text of HRS § 702-216, see infra note 13. 
22           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
      
    
        
        
      
           
            
         
          
      
         
         
       
       
         
          The  ICA  disagreed.   State  v.  Abella,  144  Hawai i  141, 
438  P.3d
  273  (App.  2019).   With  regard  to  Abella’s  argument  that 
the  medical  treatment  was  an  intervening  cause  of  Higa’s  death, 
citing  to  several  cases  from  other  jurisdictions,  the  ICA 
determined  that  the  “removal  of  life  support  is  not  an 
independent  intervening  cause  [of  death]  in  settings  similar  to 
the  instant  case.”   Id.  at  148,  438  P.3d  at  280.   The  ICA 
therefore  concluded  that  the  circuit  court  did  not  plainly  err  in 
failing  to  instruct  the  jury  “regarding  intervening  acts  by 
persons  terminating  Higa’s  medical  treatment.”   Id.  at  149,  438 
P.3d  at  281. 
In addition, based on the
 plain language of HRS § 327E-
13, the ICA determined that, “[c]ontrary to Abella’s argument, 
HRS § 327E-13(b) applies to advance health-care directives and 
other health-care decision-making procedures and the persons 
involved. It does not apply to criminal conduct which leads to 
the need for health-care .” Id. at 150, 438 P.3d at 282 (emphasis 
added). The ICA further noted that the relevant legislative 
history lacked any indication that HRS § 327E-13(b) was meant to 
“absolve defendants of alleged criminal conduct which 
necessitated that a victim receive medical treatment in the first 
place.” Id. Accordingly, the ICA rejected Abella’s argument 
that HRS § 327E-13(b) should apply. 
On the circuit court’s failure to give jury 
instructions pursuant to HRS §§ 702-215 and 702-216, the ICA 
concluded that the “removal of life support is not an independent 
23           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
          
           
           
      
   
        
         
           
             
         
       
     
    
 
      
          
          
 
          
           
      
        
       intervening cause [of death] in settings similar to the instant 
case,” citing to cases from other jurisdictions. Id. at 148-49, 
438 P.3d at 280-81. Accordingly, the ICA held that the circuit 
court did not plainly err by failing to give those instructions. 
Id. at 149, 438 P.3d at 281. 
C. Supreme Court Proceedings 
Abella timely filed an application for a writ of 
certiorari, which we accepted. His application argues that the 
ICA gravely erred for not reversing the trial court on the basis 
of HRS § 327E-13. In addition, Abella urges us to hold that the 
trial court’s failure to instruct the jury “regarding the causal 
connection[,] or lack thereof, between Abella’s conduct and 
Higa’s death” constituted plain error. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Statutory Interpretation 
“Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of 
law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.” 
Nakamoto v. Kawauchi , 142 Hawai i 259, 268, 418 P.3d  600, 609 
(2018). 
B. Jury Instructions 
“When jury instructions . . . are at issue on appeal, 
the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a 
whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, 
erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.” State v. Nichols , 111 
Hawai i 327, 334, 141 P.3d  974, 981 (2006). 
24           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  III. DISCUSSION 
           
 A. HRS § 327E-13 Does Not Prevent a Jury from Convicting Abella 
of Homicide 
We  first  consider  whether  HRS  §  327E-13  applies  to  this 
case,  which  is  a  matter  of  statutory  interpretation.   We  hold 
that  it  does  not. 
When  construing  a  statute,  “our   foremost  obligation  is 
to  ascertain  and  give  effect  to  the  intention  of  the  legislature, 
which  is  to  be  obtained  primarily  from  the  language  contained  in 
the  statute  itself.”   Nakamoto,  142  Hawai i  at  268,  418  P.3d   at 
609  (quoting  Lingle  v.  Hawai i  Gov’t  Emps.  Ass’n,  AFSCME,  Local 
152,  AFL-CIO,  107  Hawai i  178,  183,  111  P.3d  587,  592  (2005)).  
“A  ‘cardinal’  canon  of  statutory  interpretation  is  that  this 
court  ‘cannot  change  the  language  of  the  statute,  supply  a  want, 
or  enlarge  upon  it  in  order  to  make  it  suit  a  certain  state  of 
facts.’”   State  v.  Haugen,  104  Hawai i  71,  75,  85  P.3d  178,  182 
(2004)  (quoting  State  v.  Dudoit,  90  Hawai i  262,  271,  978  P.2d 
700,  709  (1999)).   
Nevertheless,  statutory  language   is   read  “in  the 
context  of  the  entire  statute”  and  interpreted  “in  a  manner 
consistent  with  its  purpose.”   Haugen,  104  Hawai i  at  76,  85   P.3d 
at  183  (quoting  Gray  v.  Admin.  Dir.  of  the  Court,  84  Hawai i  138, 
148,  931  P.2d  580,  590  (1997)).   We  construe  statutes  “to  avoid, 
if  possible,  inconsistency,  contradiction,  and  illogicality.”  
Id.  (quoting  State  v.  Cornelio,  84  Hawai i  476,  484,  935  P.2d 
1021,  1029  (1997))  (emphasis  omitted).   If  a  literal  construction 
25           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
   
          
        of  statutory  language  would  produce  an  absurd  result,  we  presume 
that  result  was  not  intended  and  construe  the  statute  in  accord 
with  its  underlying  legislative  intent.   See  id.  at  77,  85  P.3d 
at  184  (citing  Dudoit,  90  Hawai i  at  270,  978  P.2d  at  708). 
Abella argues
 that he was entitled to an acquittal 
based on HRS § 327E-13(b), a provision in the Uniform Health-Care 
Decisions Act (Modified). HRS § 327E-13(b) provides: 
(b)  Death  resulting  from  the  withholding  or  withdrawal 
of  health  care  in  accordance  with  this  chapter  shall 
not  for  any  purpose  constitute  a  suicide  or  homicide 
or  legally  impair  or  invalidate  a  policy  of  insurance 
or  an  annuity  providing  a  death  benefit, 
notwithstanding  any  term  of  the  policy  or  annuity  to 
the  contrary. 
(Emphasis  added.) 
In  effect,  Abella   interprets  this  statute  to  supply  a 
general  defense  to  criminal  liability  whenever  a  crime  victim  is 
allowed  to  die  from  their  injuries  due  to  “the  withholding  or 
withdrawal  of  health  care.”   HRS  §  327E-13(b).   He  contends  that 
because  Higa  died  from  the  decision  by  Daughter  and  the  medical 
team  to  withdraw  care,  his  death  “shall  not  for  any  purpose 
constitute  a  .  .  .  homicide[.]”   According  to  Abella,  the  terms 
“for  any  purpose”  plainly  and  unambiguously  prevent  the  State 
from  holding  anyone  criminally  liable  for  Higa’s  death.   Thus,  he 
argues,  the  statute  absolves  him  of  criminal  liability,  and  he 
was  accordingly  entitled  to  a  judgment  of  acquittal. 
However,  we  conclude   that  HRS  §  327E-13(b),  when  read 
in  context,  applies  only  to  the  persons  involved  in  making  and 
carrying  out  health-care  decisions.   Chapter  327E  codifies  in 
26           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
          
         
        
           
           Hawai i the right to refuse life-sustaining medical treatment, a 
right that is incident to the rights to privacy, bodily autonomy, 
and self-determination. The parameters of the right to refuse 
life-sustaining treatment have common law origins and may be 
traced to the seminal case In re Quinlan , 355 A.2d 647 (N.J. 
1976), cert. denied sub nom. Garger v. New Jersey, 429 U.S. 922 
(1976). 
In  Quinlan,  the   Supreme  Court  of  New  Jersey  recognized 
that  “the  State’s  interest  [in  the  preservation  of  life]  weakens 
and  the  individual’s  right  to  privacy  grows  as  the  degree  of 
bodily  invasion  increases  and  the  prognosis  dims.”   355  A.2d  at 
664.   The  court  held  that  under  the  circumstances,  Ms.  Quinlan’s 
right  to  refuse  further  life-sustaining  medical  treatment 
outweighed  the  State’s  interests.   Id.   Recognizing  that  Ms. 
Quinlan  was  no  longer  competent  to  assert  this  right,  the  court 
also  held  that  the  only  practical  way  to  protect  it  would  be  to 
permit  her  family  to  assert  it  on  her  behalf.   Id.   Further,  the 
court  considered  the  relationship  between  this  right  and  the 
criminal  law.   The  Quinlan  court  made  clear  that  physicians  who 
carry  out  these  wishes  would  not  be  held  criminally  liable  for 
terminating  life-sustaining  treatment,  consequently  accelerating 
the  patient’s  death.   Id.  at  669–70. 
Since  this  1976  decision,  state  courts  and  the  United 
States  Supreme  Court  have  recognized  the  right  to  refuse 
treatment,  and  developed  tests  for  determining  how  and  when  this 
right  may  be  asserted  in  specific  circumstances.   See,  e.g., 
27           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Cruzan  v.  Director,  Missouri  Dep’t  of  Health,  497  U.S.  261  (1990) 
(recognizing  that  a  competent  person  has  a  Fourteenth  Amendment 
liberty  interest  in  refusing  medical  treatment);  Matter  of 
Welfare  of  Colyer,  660  P.2d  730  (Wash.  1983);  In  re  Conroy,  486 
A.2d  1209  (N.J.  1985)  (holding  that  an  incompetent,  but  not 
necessarily  comatose,  patient  has  the  right  to  refuse  life-
sustaining  treatment).   Recognizing  the  issue  as  a  fundamental 
societal  concern,  state  legislatures  have  passed  laws  addressing 
the  right  to  refuse  life-sustaining  medical  treatment, 
established  procedures  for  creating  and  implementing  advance 
directives  (i.e.  “living  wills”),  and  enabled  surrogate  decision-
makers  to  exercise  authority  on  another’s  behalf.   See,  e.g., 
N.J.S.A.  26:2H-54a  (“New  Jersey  Advance  Directives  for  Health 
Care  Act”);  GA  Code  Ann.  §  31-32-1  (“Georgia  Advance  Directive 
for  Health  Care  Act”);  Cal.  Prob.  Code  §§  4600-4660  (“Health  Care 
Decisions  Law”). 
In  1986,  the  Hawai  i  legislature  followed  suit,  
enacting  HRS  chapter  327D.   1986  Haw.  Sess.  Laws.  Act  338.   This 
act,  among  other  things,  recognized  the  right  to  individual 
autonomy  in  medical  choices  and  protected  medical  providers  from 
criminal  prosecution.   See,  e.g.,  HRS  §  327D-1  (1993)  (“The 
legislature  finds  that  all  competent  persons  have  the  fundamental 
right  to  control  the  decisions  relating  to  their  own  medical 
care,  including  the  decision  to  have  medical  or  surgical  means  or 
procedures  calculated  to  prolong  their  lives  provided,  continued, 
withheld,  or  withdrawn.”);  id.  §  327D-14  (“Death  resulting  from 
28           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
  the  withholding  or  withdrawal  of  life-sustaining  procedures  from 
a  patient  under  this  chapter  does  not,  for  any  purpose, 
constitute  a  suicide.”);  id.  §  327D-18  (“In  the  absence  of  actual 
notice  of  the  revocation  of  a  declaration,  no  health  care 
provider,  health  care  facility,  physician,  or  any  other  person 
acting  under  the  direction  of  an  attending  physician  shall  be 
subject  to  criminal  prosecution  .  .  .  as  a  result  of  the 
withholding  or  the  withdrawal  of  life-sustaining  procedures  from 
a  patient  in  accordance  with  this  chapter[.]”). 
In  1999,  the  Hawai  i  legislature  replaced  chapter   327D 
with  chapter  327E,  the  Uniform  Health-Care  Decisions  Act.   1999 
Haw.  Sess.  Laws  Act  169.   Standing  Committee  Report  No.  1600  from 
the  Senate  Committee  on  the  Judiciary  stated: 
The purpose of this measure is to enact the Uniform 
Health-Care Decisions Act. 
Your  Committee  finds  that  since  the  Supreme  Court's 
decision  in  Cruzan  v.  Commissioner,  Missouri  Department  of 
Health,  497  U.S.  261  (1990),  significant  changes  have 
occurred  in  state  legislation  on  health  care  decision 
making.   Nearly  all  states  have  statutes  authorizing  the  use 
of  powers  of  attorney  for  health  care.   In  addition,  a 
majority  of  states  have  statutes  allowing  family  members, 
and  in  some  cases  close  friends,  to  make  health  care 
decisions  for  adult  individuals  or  emancipated  minors  who 
lack  capacity. 
However,  your Committee  recognizes  that there is a
greater  need  for  uniformity  among  advance  directives  for 
health  care  and  believes  that  this  Uniform  Health  Care 
Decisions  Act  will  simplify  and  facilitate  the  making  of 
advance  health  care  directives.  .  .  .  .       
    
Your  Committee  in tends  that  this  measure  replace 
chapter  327D,  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes,  relating  to  medical 
treatment  decisions  which  was  first  enacted  in  1986  and  has 
not  been  revised  since  1992.   In  the  intervening  years, 
medical  science  has  advanced  tremendously  and  medical  ethics 
has  developed  correspondingly.   This  measure  brings  medical 
treatment  decisions  into  today's  world  of  advances  in 
medicine,  patient  rights,  and  attitudes  toward  dying.   Your 
29           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
         
  
           Co
mmittee notes that this measure is not intended to disrupt 
the existing surrogate law and practices in acute care and 
long-term care settings. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1600, in 1999 Senate Journal, at 1657. 
HRS  §  327E-13(b)   closely  tracks   13(b)  of  the  Uniform 
Health-Care  Decisions  Act  (1993).   See  Unif.  Health-Care 
Decisions  Act  §  13(b)  (“Death  resulting  from  the  withholding  or 
withdrawal  of  health  care  in  accordance  with  this  [Act]  does  not 
for  any  purpose  constitute  a  suicide  or  homicide  or  legally 
impair  or  invalidate  a  policy  of  insurance  or  an  annuity 
providing  a  death  benefit,  notwithstanding  any  term  of  the  policy 
or  annuity  to  the  contrary.”).   HRS  §  327E-13(b)  is  also 
substantively  the  same  as  other  state  statutes  derived  from  the 
uniform  law.   See,  e.g.,  Cal.  Prob.  Code  §  4656;  Me.  Rev.  Stat. 
Ann.  tit.  5,  §  813(b);  Miss.  Code.  Ann.  §  41-41-227(2);  see  also 
N.M.  Stat.  Ann.  §  24-7A-13(B)  (“Death  resulting  from  the 
withholding  or  withdrawal  of  health  care  in  accordance  with  the 
Uniform  Health-Care  Decisions  Act  does  not  for  any  purpose:  (1) 
constitute  a  suicide,  a  homicide,  or  other  crime[.]”). 
In  declaring  that   “[d]eath  resulting  from  the 
withholding  or  withdrawal  of  health  care  in  accordance  with  this 
chapter  shall  not  for  any  purpose  constitute  a  suicide  or 
homicide,”  HRS  §  327E-13(b),  the  Hawai i  legislature   adopted   the 
well-recognized   principle   that  persons   properly   involved   in
 
making  and  carrying   out  decisions   to  terminate   life-support, 
including   patients,   surrogates,   and  doctors,   should  be  free  of 
criminal  and  civil  liability  for  their  involvement.   See,  e.g., 
30           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
         
       
    
          
          
             
              
         
           
              
             
            
             
          
         
         
        
       
       
      
          
         
       
         
        
         
       
     
      
        
  
     
        
           
        
              
            
         
         Matter  of  Farrell,  529  A.2d  404,  415–16  (N.J.  1987);  In  re 
Quinlan,  355
  A.2d  at  669.   There  is  no  indication  in  either  the 
language  or  legislative  history  of  HRS  chapter  327E,  or  in  case 
law  related  to  the  right  to  refuse  treatment,  that  the  exercise 
of  this  right  protects  any  person  from  criminal  liability.   11 
The  statute’s  language  should  not  be  taken  out  of 
context;  rather,  it  should  be  read  to  protect  only  those  whose 
11 For example, in the New Jersey case Matter of Farrell , the 
plaintiff petitioned to the New Jersey Chancery Court to be appointed the 
special medical guardian for his wife, who had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(more commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease), and had expressly granted 
permission to remove a respirator that had been keeping her alive for the past 
three years. 514 A.2d 1342, 1343 (N.J. Ch. 1986). The court recognized Mrs. 
Farrell’s right to discontinue this life-sustaining treatment, found that Mrs. 
Farrell was competent and capable of making this decision, and appointed the 
plaintiff, her husband, as her guardian ad litem to carry out her wishes. Id. 
at 1347. In addition, the court ordered “that [Mr.] Farrell, or any physician 
or other person involved in the removal of said respirator from [Mrs.] Farrell 
pursuant to the terms of this judgment, will be free from any criminal and 
civil liability.” Id. In a footnote, the court explained: 
This finding is made in accordance with In The Matter 
of Quinlan , 70 N.J. 10, 51-52, 355 A.2d 647[, 669] 
(1976), where the New Jersey Supreme Court stated that 
upon the termination of life support systems, “the 
ensuing death would not be homicide but rather 
expiration from existing natural causes. Secondly, 
even if it were to be regarded as homicide, it would 
not be unlawful.” The Quinlan Court added that there 
is a “real” and “determinative distinction between the 
unlawful taking of the life of another and the ending 
of artificial life support systems as a matter of 
self-determination.” Id. at 52, 355 A.2d 647. The 
Court clearly established that the exercise of this 
constitutional right is protected from criminal 
prosecution, which “extends to third parties whose 
action is necessary to effectuate the exercise of that 
right.” Ibid. 
Id. at 1347 n.3 (emphasis added). 
The New Jersey Supreme Court affirmed the chancery court’s 
decision, and, in addition to providing guidance for when a patient requests 
“the discontinuance of life-sustaining medical treatment,” Matter of Farrell , 
529 A.2d at 413, it held that “no civil or criminal liability will be incurred 
by any person who, in good faith reliance on the procedures established in 
this opinion , withdraws life-sustaining treatment at the request of an 
informed and competent patient[.]” Id. at 415–16 (emphasis added). 
31           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conduct  “in  accordance  with  [chapter  327E]”  leads  to  the 
patient’s  death.   Chapter  327E  specifically  enumerates  and 
defines  people  who  are  relevant  to  its  provisions.   This  list 
includes  agents  (someone  who  has  “power  of  attorney  for  health 
care  to  make  a  health-care  decision  for  the  individual  granting 
the  power”);  guardians  (“a  judicially  appointed  guardian  having 
authority  to  make  a  health-care  decision  for  an  individual”); 
health-care  providers  (“an  individual  licensed,  certified,  or 
otherwise  authorized  or  permitted  by  law  to  provide  health  care 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  or  practice  of  a  profession”); 
and  others.   HRS  §  327E-2.   Those  corresponding  people  in  Higa’s 
life  acted  “in  accordance  with”  Chapter  327E-2  when  they  decided 
to  remove  his  ventilator.   HRS  §  327E-13(b).   Abella,  when  he 
allegedly  set  into  motion  the  events  leading  to  Higa’s  death,  did 
not.  
Accordingly,  we  hold   that  HRS  §  327E-13(b)  does  not 
shield  from  criminal  liability  for  homicide  those  actors  whose 
conduct  caused  another  to  require  life-saving  medical 
intervention  if  the  victim’s  medical  care  is  subsequently 
withdrawn,  causing  death.   To  hold  otherwise  would  lead  to 
absurdity.   Haugen,  104  Hawai i  at  76–77,   85  P.3d  at  183–84 
(“Every  construction  which  leads  to  an  absurdity  shall  be 
rejected.”)  (citation  omitted).   Interpreting  HRS  §  327E-13(b)  to 
apply  to  any  actor  would  insulate  from  liability  the  very  person 
who  caused  Higa  to  require  life  support  technology  to  stay  alive.  
In  other  words,  the  legislature  could  not  have  intended  for  a 
32           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
            
          
           
         
       
        
       
          
         
           
           
        
         
  
         
       
        
       
          
    
      
        
        
        
  
        statute designed to protect an individual’s right to bodily 
autonomy in the age of medical advancement to be used as a shield 
for a wrongdoer who caused the need for medical intervention in 
the first place - and did so by severe physical intrusion into 
someone else’s bodily autonomy, the very right enshrined in the 
statute. 
The above analysis supports the conclusion that HRS 
§ 327E-13(b) of the Uniform Health-Care Decisions Act shields 
family members and medical professionals from criminal liability 
for death resulting from the withdrawal of medical care, but it 
does not extend its protections to actors whose conduct rendered 
medical care necessary in the first instance. Thus, we hold that 
HRS § 327E-13(b) does not bar Abella, an actor whom the statute 
does not contemplate protecting, from being convicted of a 
homicide. Therefore, Abella’s motion for a judgment of acquittal 
was properly denied. 
B. The Circuit Court Should Have Instructed the Jury on 
Causation Pursuant to HRS §§ 702-215 and 702-216 
We next consider whether Abella was entitled to jury 
instructions on causation and intervening action under HRS 
§§ 702-21512 and 702-216.13 We hold that the circuit court 
12 HRS § 702-215 provides: 
In the following instances intentionally or knowingly 
causing a particular result shall be deemed to be 
established even though the actual result caused by the 
defendant may not have been within the defendant's intention 
or contemplation : 
(1) The actual result differs from that intended or 
(continued...) 
33 12          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
       
   
     
       
      
 
          
         
        
       
        
   
 
    
        
        
        
        
       
 plainly  erred  by  failing  to  include  instructions  pursuant  to 
those  provisions. 
In  a  jury  trial,  it  is  the  court’s  responsibility  to 
ensure  that  the  jury  is  properly  instructed  on  the  law  and  the 
questions  the  jury  is  to  decide.   See  Nichols,  111  Hawai i  at 
334-35,  141  P.3d  at
  981-82.   The  State  must  prove  “[e]ach  element 
of  the  offense”  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.   HRS  §  701-114.  
Causation  is  a  question  of  fact  (and  an  element  of  the  offense  of 
(...continued) 
contemplated, as the case may be, only in the respect 
that a different person or different property is 
injured or affected or that the injury or harm 
intended or contemplated would have been more serious 
or more extensive than that caused; or 
(2) The actual result involves the same kind of injury or 
harm as the intended or contemplated result and is not 
too remote or accidental in its occurrence or too 
dependent on another's volitional conduct to have a 
bearing on the defendant's liability or on the gravity 
of the defendant's offense. 
(Emphasis added.) 
13 HRS § 702-216 provides: 
In  the  following  inst ances,  recklessly  .  .  .  causing  a 
particular  result  shall  be  deemed  to  be  established  even 
though  the  actual  result  caused  by  the  defendant  may  not 
have  been  within  the  risk  of  which  the  defendant  was  .  .  . 
aware: 
(1) The actual res
ult differs from the probable result 
only in the respect that a different person or 
different property is injured or affected or that the 
probable injury or harm would have been more serious 
or more extensive than that caused; or 
(2) The actual result involves  th e same kind of injury or
harm  as  the  probable  result  and  is  not  too  remote  or 
accidental  in  its  occurrence  or  too  dependent  on 
another's  volitional  conduct  to  have  a  bearing  on  the 
defendant's  liability  or  on  the  gravity  of  the 
defendant's  offense.       
    
(Emphasis  added.) 
34           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
  
   
     
   
          
     
       
     
         
        
          
          
    
        
         
       
        
       
      
         
         
         
        
   
       
          
          
           
     
        
        
        
        
      
         
                  
         manslaughter)  and  is  therefore  reserved  for  the  jury  as  fact 
finder  to  determine.  
The  Hawai i  Penal  Code  addresses  causation   in  HRS 
§§  702-214,  702-215,  and  702-216,  which  are  derived  from  the 
Model  Penal  Code  (MPC)  §  2.03.14   HRS  §  702-214  supplies  the  test 
14 MPC § 2.03 provides: 
(1) Conduct is the cause of a result when: 
(a) it is an antecedent but for which the result in 
question would not have occurred; and 
(b) the relationship between the conduct and result 
satisfies any additional causal requirements imposed 
by the Code or by the law defining the offense. 
(2) When purposely or knowingly causing a particular result 
is an element of an offense, the element is not established 
if the actual result is not within the purpose or the 
contemplation of the actor unless: 
(a) the actual result differs from that designed or 
contemplated, as the case may be, only in the respect 
that a different person or different property is 
injured or affected or that the injury or harm 
designed or contemplated would have been more serious 
or more extensive than that caused; or 
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury 
or harm as that designed or contemplated and is not 
too remote or accidental in its occurrence to have a 
[just] bearing on the actor's liability or on the 
gravity of his offense. 
(3) When recklessly or negligently causing a particular 
result is an element of an offense, the element is not 
established if the actual result is not within the risk of 
which the actor is aware or, in the case of negligence, of 
which he should be aware unless: 
(a) the actual result differs from the probable result 
only in the respect that a different person or 
different property is injured or affected or that the 
probable injury or harm would have been more serious 
or more extensive than that caused; or 
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury 
or harm as the probable result and is not too remote 
or accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] 
bearing on the actor's liability or on the gravity of 
(continued...) 
35 14          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
         
            
             
           
           
        
           
         
           
          
        
      
          
        
          
     
    
 
         
         
         
       for “actual causation” and “is commonly called the ‘but for’ 
test.” HRS § 702-214 cmt. (2014). Like subsection 1(a) of MPC 
§ 2.03, it provides: “Conduct is the cause of a result when it is 
an antecedent but for which the result in question would not have 
occurred.” HRS § 702-214. According to the Commentary to this 
statute, once actual causation is established, “causality in its 
strict sense is finished and attention must then shift to §§ 702-
215 and 216 which deal with the defendant’s culpability with 
respect to the result.” HRS § 702-214 cmt. (2014). But: 
The difficulty of the problem of causation does not lie in 
making a determination of actual causation, but rather in 
setting the appropriate standard for determining those 
instances in which the defendant will not be held liable for 
the result of the defendant's conduct because the defendant 
did not intend or contemplate the result or was unaware of 
the risk that it would obtain. 
HRS § 702-214 cmt. (2014). 
To  address  that  difficulty,  the  Hawai i  legislature 
adopted  the
  “culpability”  assessment  in  HRS  §§  702-215  and  216  as 
the  proper  inquiry  for  determining  whether  it  would  be  unjust  to 
attribute  the  result  that  occurred  to  the  defendant’s  conduct, 
even  if  the  conduct  was  a  cause-in-fact  of  that  result.   See  HRS 
§  702-214  cmt.  (2014).   This  test  derives  from  subsections  (2) 
and  (3)  of  MPC  §  2.03,  but  clarifies  the  MPC  in  an  important 
respect:  HRS  §§  702-215  and  216  make  explicit  that  “another’s 
(...continued) 
his offense. 
(4) When causing a particular result is a material element 
of an offense for which absolute liability is imposed by 
law, the element is not established unless the actual result 
is a probable consequence of the actor's conduct. 
36           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
       
 
        
          
         
        
        
         
       
         
        
           
          
        
  
         
        
       
        
          
          
        
        
         
        
 volitional  conduct”  may  be  a  factor  to  consider  in  the 
“culpability”  analysis.   See  HRS  §  702-215  cmt.  (2014).   In 
State  v.  Pelham
,  the  dissent  recognized  that  Hawai i  and  New 
Jersey
  are  the  only  two  states  “that  have  adopted  MPC  §  2.03  and 
explicitly  added  the  intervening  volitional  conduct  of  others  as 
a  factor  to  be  considered  in  determining  causation.”    824  A.2d 
1082,  1097  (N.J.  2003)  (Albin,   J.,  dissenting) 1615 
As noted in the Commentary to
 the HRS, the 
“culpability” standard relates to the idea of “proximate cause” 
in that “culpability” captures when the law will “allow the just 
imposition of liability” for causing a particular result. HRS 
§ 702-214 cmt. (2014). However, the culpability standard 
departs from the common-law concept of ‘proximate cause’ (at 
best a poor label for a host of largely unarticulated 
considerations) and analyzes the question of whether a 
defendant will be held liable for having caused a particular 
result not in terms of factual or “scientific” causation 
(which has to be resolved according to the test set forth in 
§ 702-214) but in terms of those factors which properly bear 
on the defendant's culpability with respect to a result 
15 The Commentary explains: 
The Code follows the Model Penal Code1 as supplemented by 
the suggestion of Hart and Honore that provisions regarding 
liability for unintended or uncontemplated results must be 
separately stated for those instances when the difference in 
result is due to natural events and those instances when it 
is due to the volitional conduct of another. Although the 
commentary to the Model Penal Code would suggest that 
volitional conduct of another is adequately covered as a 
factor which might make the actual result “too remote or 
accidental,” greater clarity is achieved by the language of 
this Code. 
HRS  §  702-215  cmt .  (2014)  (footnotes  omitted)  (citing  H.L.A.  Hart  &  A.M. 
Honore,  Causation  in  the  Law  (1959)). 
16 For  this  reason,  we  consider  case  law  from  New  Jersey  interpreting 
similar  causation  principles  as  persuasive  authority  on  these  provisions. 
37           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
         
         
         
         
       
       
          
      
       
        
       ot
her than one which the defendant intended or contemplated. 
The factors to be considered are, as stated, whether the 
actual result is more serious or extensive than the intended 
or contemplated result and whether the actual result is too 
remote or accidental in its occurrence or too dependent on 
another's volitional conduct to have a bearing on 
defendant's liability (or the gravity of the defendant’s 
offense). 
HRS § 702-215 cmt. (2014); see id. § 702-216 cmt. (2014). 
The  culpability  standard  for  causation  comes  into  play 
when  the  actual  result  can  be  “contrasted  with  the  designed  or 
contemplated  (or  in  the  case  of  subsection  (3),  the  probable) 
result  in  terms  of  its  specific  character  and  manner  of 
occurrence.”   State  v.  Martin,  573  A.2d  1359,  1364  (N.J.  1990) 
(emphasis  added)  (quoting  Model  Penal  Code  and  Commentaries 
§  2.03  comment  at  260  n.13  (1985)).   Subsection  (1)  of  both  HRS 
§§  702-215  and  216  refer  to  differences  in  the  character  of  the 
actual  result.   See,  e.g.,  HRS  §  702-215(1)  (considering  when  “a 
different  person  or  different  property  is  injured  or  affected”  or 
when  the  injury  or  harm  is  more  or  less  serious  than 
contemplated).   Subsection  (2)  of  both  statutes  refers  to 
differences  in  the  manner  of  the  result’s  occurrence.   See,  e.g., 
HRS  §  702-215(2)  (considering  whether  the  result  is  “too  remote 
or  accidental  in  its  occurrence”  or  whether  its  occurrence  is 
“too  dependent  on  another’s  volitional  conduct”).   
Specifically, subsection (2) concerns
 the concept of 
intervening causation. In a case involving reckless 
manslaughter, the Supreme Court of New Jersey addressed the 
concept of intervening causation under N.J.S.A. 2C:2-3(c), a 
38           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        statutory  provision  that  is  substantially  identical  to  HRS  §  702-
216,  as  follows: 
[W]hen  permitted  by  the  law,  “‘it  is  for  the  jury  to 
determine  whether  intervening  causes  or  unforeseen 
conditions  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  unjust  to  find 
that  the  defendant's  conduct  is  the  cause  of  the  actual 
result.’”  Pelham,  supra,  176  N.J.  at  461,  824  A.2d  [at  1089-
90]  (quoting  Martin,  supra,  119  N.J.  at  13,  573  A.2d  [at 
1365]).   The  Code  “does  not  identify  what  may  be  an 
intervening  cause,”  ibid.,  but  “‘deals  only  with  the 
ultimate  criterion  by  which  the  significance  of  such 
possibilities  ought  to  be  judged,’”  Martin,  supra,  119  N.J. 
at  13,  573  A.2d  [at  1365]  (quoting  [The  New  Jersey  Penal 
Code:  Final  Report  of  the  New  Jersey  Criminal  Law  Revision 
Commission],  commentary  to  §  2C:2–3,  at  50).   An 
“‘intervening  cause’”  occurs  when  an  event  “‘comes  between 
the  initial  event  in  a  sequence  and  the  end  result,  thereby 
altering  the  natural  course  of  events  that  might  have 
connected  a  wrongful  act  to  an  injury.’”   Pelham,  supra,  176 
N.J.  at  461,  824  A.2d  [at  1090]  (quoting  Black's  Law 
Dictionary  212  (7th  ed.  1999)).   “Generally,  to  avoid 
breaking  the  chain  of  causation  for  criminal  liability,  a 
variation  between  the  result  intended  or  risked  and  the 
actual  result  of  [the]  defendant's  conduct  must  not  be  so 
out  of  the  ordinary  that  it  is  unfair  to  hold  [the] 
defendant  responsible  for  that  result.”   Id.  at  461–62,  824 
A.2d  [at  1090]  (citing  Martin,  supra,  119  N.J.  at  14,  573 
A.2d  [at  1365];  Wayne  R.  LaFave  &  Austin  W.  Scott,  Jr., 
Handbook  on  Criminal  Law  §  35,  at  246  (1972)).   Thus,  an 
“intervening  cause”  denotes  an  event  or  condition  which 
renders  a  result  “too  remote,  accidental  in  its  occurrence, 
or  dependent  on  another’s  volitional  act”  to  fairly  affect 
criminal  liability  or  the  gravity  of  the  offense.   See 
N.J.S.A.  2C:2–3(c);  Pelham,  supra,  176  N.J.  at  461–62,  824 
A.2d  [at  1090]. 
State v. Buckley , 78 A.3d 958, 968 (N.J. 2013). 
In  the  instant   case,  the  circuit  court  instructed  the 
jury  only  as  to  “but  for”  causation  under  HRS  §  702-214.   At  the 
time,  Abella  did  not  request  a  causation  jury  instruction  based 
on  the  culpability  standard  relating  to  intervening  causation  in 
subsection  (2)  of  HRS  §§  702-215  and  -216.   As  such,  he  asks  this 
court  to  recognize  plain  error  in  omitting  such  an  instruction.  
39           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
        
         
        
        
        
         
     
  
      
        
           He asserts: 
Here, there was an intervening act by numerous persons, 
other than Abella, i.e., medical treatment, and a decision 
made that terminated Higa's life. In other words, the 
result caused was “too remote” or “too dependent on 
another's volitional conduct to have a bearing on the 
defendant's liability or on the gravity of the defendant's 
offense.” § 702-215(2), HRS [2014]; see also § 702-216(2), 
HRS [2014] (reckless or negligent causation). 
In  this  case,  the  court’s  instruction  on  causation  was 
an  incomplete  and  a  misleading  statement  of  the  law  - and  thus 
plain  error  - because  it  omitted  any  reference  to  the 
“culpability”  standard  in  HRS  §§  702-215(2)  and  –216(2).  
Evidence  was  adduced  at  trial  of  intervening  events,  from  which  a 
jury  could  have  inferred  that  Abella’s  culpability  was 
diminished.   Specifically,  jurors  could  have  considered  evidence 
of  Higa’s  daily  improvements  after  his  surgery,  showing  that  Higa 
could  reach  toward  stimuli  and  open  his  eyes  in  response  to 
voice,  that  he  was  becoming  more  alert,  and  that  his  condition 
was  not  worsening.   Jurors  also  could  have  considered  Dr. 
Oshiro’s  testimony  that  it  was  “probably  possible”  that  Higa 
could  have  regained  independent  breathing.   Moreover,  jurors 
could  have  also  fairly  considered  the  circumstances  surrounding 
the  decision  to  withdraw  Higa’s  life  support,  including  that 
Higa’s  daughter  was  not  informed  of  the  progress  he  had  been 
making  since  the  surgery.  
This evidence could enable a jury to conclude that 
intervening volitional conduct caused Higa’s death such that it 
would be unjust to convict Abella of a homicide. “When the 
40           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
          
         
        
           
          
           
         
 
            
         
            
            
          
           
           
          
          
        
          
          
         
            
       
           
       
          
          
         
         
       actual result is of the same character, but occurred in a 
different manner from that designed or contemplated, it is for 
the jury to determine whether intervening causes or unforeseen 
conditions lead to the conclusion that it is unjust to find that 
the defendant’s conduct is the cause of the actual result.” 
Martin, 573 A.2d at 1365. Indeed, in his closing argument before 
the jury, defense counsel specifically urged the jurors to draw 
this conclusion: 
One more thing. Remember I asked the doctor, I said what if 
you didn't pull the tubes out, would he have survived 
another day? He said yeah. Would you survive another day? 
Said yeah. Would you survive another day? Yeah. So they 
don't really know to this day whether that guy would still 
be alive and what kind of progress he would have been making 
over this past year. They really don't know, and they made 
a judgment call, and in making that judgment call, they want 
you to hold my client responsible for that, and that's just 
not right. That's just not right. 
In light of the evidence, whether it would be unjust to 
hold Abella accountable for the result he in fact caused is 
precisely the inquiry the legislature intended for a jury to 
consider per subsection (2) of HRS §§ 702-215 and -216. In this 
instance, by limiting the jurors’ understanding of legal 
causation to the “but for” rule under HRS § 702-214, the circuit 
court prevented the jurors from meaningfully considering the 
issue of whether it would be unjust to consider Abella criminally 
liable for causing Higa’s death on July 29, 2014 based on 
evidence of intervening events. For this reason, the circuit 
court plainly erred in omitting a jury instruction based on 
subsection (2) of HRS §§ 702-215 and -216. 
41           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
    
      
       
         
    In  reaching  this  conclusion,  we  disagree  with  the  ICA’s 
holding  that,  as  a  matter  of  law,  removal  of  life  support  cannot 
constitute  an  intervening  cause  that  may  absolve  a  defendant  from 
liability  for  causing  death.   See  Abella,  144  Hawai i  at  148-49, 
438  P.3d
  at  280-81.   Thus,  we  also  disagree  with  the  New  Jersey 
Supreme  Court  majority  in  Pelham,  relied  upon  by  the  ICA. 
Pelham  is  the  only  case  cited  by  the  ICA  that  is 
directly  relevant  to  the  instant  case,  given  the  unique  statutory 
definitions  of  causation  in  New  Jersey  and  Hawai i.  In  Pelham, 17 
17 In  addition  to  Pelham,  the  ICA  cited  People  v.  Bowles,  607  N.W.2d 
715  (Mich.  2000),  State  v.  Yates,  824  P.2d  519  (Wash.  App.  1992),  and  People 
v.  Funes,  28  Cal.Rptr.2d  758  (Cal.  App.  1994).   See  Abella,  114  Hawai i  at 
148-49.    T
he  majority  in  Pelham  also  favorably  cited  these  cases.   See  Pelham,  
824  A.2d  at  1091-92.   However,  the  Pelham  dissent  persuasively  observed: 
New Jersey is
 only one of two states that have adopted MPC 
§ 2.03 and explicitly added the intervening volitional 
conduct of others as a factor to be considered in 
determining causation. . . . 
[T]he  majority’s   heavy  reliance  on  other  states’ 
common-law  proximate  causation  jurisprudence  as  support  for 
its  position  is  misplaced.   Not  one  case  cited  by  the 
majority  interprets  a  causation  provision  similar  to  our 
own.   Only  twelve  states  have  codified  general  statutory 
causation  provisions.   Three  states  have  adopted  the 
essential  elements  of  MPC  §  2.03  verbatim,  and  do  not 
include  N.J.S.A.  2C:2–3’s  additional  requirements  that  the 
actual  result  of  a  defendant’s  conduct  not  be  “too  .  .  . 
dependent  on  another’s  volitional  act  to  have  a  just 
bearing”  on  his  liability  or  on  the  gravity  of  the  offense.  
Three  states  have  wholly  rejected  the  MPC  causation 
provision  on  which  ours  was  patterned  and  instead  rely 
solely  on  a  draft  provision  of  the  Final  Report  of  the 
National  Commission  on  Reform  of  Federal  Criminal  Laws 
(Brown  Commission)  that  “deals  with  only  one  aspect  of  the 
traditional  problem  of  causation,  indicating  that  if  an  act 
is  a  but-for’  or  concurrent  cause  of  a  result  causation  ‘may 
be  found.’”   See  MPC,  supra,  §  2.03  cmt.  5  at  264–65  &  n. 
23.   Two  states  have  adopted  provisions  incorporating  the 
Brown  Commission  draft  provision,  along  with  provisions 
analogous  to  MPC  §  2.03(3)(a),  supra  note  2.6.   Two  states 
have  adopted  the  MPC  tentative  draft  alternative  that  the 
ALI  ultimately  rejected,  and  thus  couch  causation 
culpability  in  terms  of  whether  the  actual  result  was 
(continued...) 
42 17          *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
        
         
         
             
          
           
           
        
          
         
        
          
            
   
      
      
         
          
          
    
     the victim suffered “catastrophic injuries” after a car accident, 
including a spinal column fracture paralyzing him from the chest 
down, multiple broken ribs, a punctured lung, and head injury, 
among other things. 824 A.2d at 1084. He required a vena cava 
filter, a surgical airway through his neck and into his windpipe, 
a feeding tube inserted directly to his stomach, and a catheter. 
Id. Despite his brain injuries, he “was aware of his physical 
and cognitive disabilities” and occasionally “tried to remove his 
ventilator” during lucid moments. Id. at 1085. About five 
months after the accident, “[b]ecause of his brain damage, his 
lack of improvement, and his severe infections[,] [his] family 
decided to act in accordance with his wishes and remove the 
ventilator.” Id. He was pronounced dead within two hours of the 
ventilator’s removal. Id. 
The defendant, who was charged with aggravated 
manslaughter and convicted of second-degree vehicular homicide, 
argued on appeal that the trial court committed reversible error 
in instructing the jury that “the removal of life supports, in 
this case a ventilator, is not a sufficient intervening cause to 
(...continued) 
“foreseen  or  foreseeable   as  a  substantial  probability.”   See 
MPC,  supra,  §  2.03  cmt.  3  at  261  n.  17.   The  majority’s 
reliance  on  other  jurisdictions'  law  of  causation  is  thus 
not  persuasive  because  those  cases  do  not  interpret  our 
unique  provision,  which  explicitly  incorporates  both  the 
intervening  volitional  conduct  of  others  and  the  jury’s 
sense  of  justice  as  factors  to  be  considered  in  determining 
a  defendant's  liability. 
Id. at
 1097, 1099 (Albin, J., dissenting) (footnotes omitted) (emphasis 
added). 
43           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
           
        
       
          
          
            
       
            
    
        
            
            
        
        relieve the defendant of criminal liability.” Id. at 1086. The 
court of appeals agreed and vacated the conviction, concluding 
that “the trial judge’s instructions on intervening cause 
deprived defendant of the opportunity to have the jury decide the 
essential issue of causation.” State v. Pelham, 801 A.2d 448, 
456 (N.J. App. 2002). The court of appeals thus held that the 
instruction “deprived defendant of his constitutional right to 
have the jury in a criminal trial to decide all elements of the 
charged offense.” Id. 
On further review, the Supreme Court of New Jersey 
upheld the conviction. See Pelham, 824 A.2d at 1092. The court 
held that “removal of life support, as a matter of law, may not 
constitute an independent cause for purposes of lessening a 
criminal defendant’s liability.” Id. The majority reasoned: 
Removal  of  life-sustaining  treatment  is  a  victim's  right.  
It  is  thus  foreseeable  that  a  victim  may  exercise  his  or  her 
right  not  to  be  placed  on,  or  to  be  removed  from,  life 
support  systems.   Because  the  exercise  of  the  right  does  not 
break  unexpectedly,  or  in  any  extraordinary  way,  the  chain 
of  causation  that  a  defendant  initiated  and  that  led  to  the 
need  for  life  support,  it  is  not  an  intervening  cause  that 
may  be  advanced  by  the  defendant. 
Id.  at  1093. 
The  court’s  decision  in  Pelham  turned  largely  and,  in 
our  view,  incorrectly,  on  the  importance  of  upholding  a  person’s 
right  to  refuse  life-sustaining  medical  treatment  and  “the  effect 
to  be  given  to  a  victim’s  exercise  of  that  right  in  the  context 
of  a  homicide  trial.”   Id.  at  1089.   As  the  dissent  pointed  out, 
Pelham  was  “not  about  a  patient’s  right  to  self-determination” 
44           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
    
     
         
           
        
          
           
           
         
         
            
   and  the  majority’s  ruling,  in  essence,  “conflates  the  right  of 
the  patient  to  self-determination  with  the  right  of  the  accused 
to  have  his  case  decided  by  a  jury.”   Id.  at  1095-96  (Albin,  J., 
dissenting). 
The  dissent  focused  on  N.J.S.A.   2C:2-3c,  the  criminal 
causation  provision  patterned  on  the  MPC,  which  provides  for  the 
consideration  of  whether  a  result  is  “too  remote,  accidental  in 
its  occurrence,  or  dependent  on  another’s  volitional  act  to  have 
a  just  bearing  on  the  actor’s  liability  or  on  the  gravity  of  his 
offense.”   Id.  at  1095  (Albin,   J.,  dissenting).   The  dissent 
observed  that  this  “general  and  broad  language  .  .  .  was  intended 
to  apply  to  the  infinite  number  of  variables  that  arise  in  the 
unique  circumstances  of  each  case,  including  that  of  this 
defendant.”   Id.  (Albin,  J.,  dissenting).   The  dissent  also 
emphasized,  “Causation  was  a  matter  that  the  jury  should  have 
been  trusted  to  decide  correctly”  and  that  the  majority  “ignores 
the  statutory  language  that  governs  this  case[.]”   Id.  (Albin, 
J.,  dissenting).   Further,  the  dissent  noted: 18 
the drafters of our Code clearly contemplated, as previously 
recognized by this Court, that “[w]hen the actual result is 
of the same character, but occurred in a different manner 
. . ., it is for the jury to determine whether intervening 
causes or unforeseen conditions lead to the conclusion that 
it is unjust to find that the defendant's conduct is the 
cause of the actual result.” Martin, supra, 119 N.J. at 13, 
573 A.2d [at 1366-67] (emphasis added). This is just such a 
case. 
Here, . . . defendant does not dispute that his 
18 Although HRS §§ 702-215(2) and 702-216(2) differ from the New 
Jersey provision because they do not include the word “just,” this does not 
bear on our analysis. 
45           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
        
         
       
        
          
         
         
         
         
          
       
        
         
         
        
        
         
          
       
          
         
          
           
      
      
           
 co
nduct was a “but-for” cause of the victim's death. 
Instead, he claims that the State must prove the additional 
requirement of N.J.S.A. 2C:2–3c that he recklessly caused 
the actual result, i.e., the victim's death, five months 
after the accident and two hours after the victim and his 
family elected to disconnect his ventilator. In order for 
this defendant to be guilty of vehicular homicide, the State 
must prove that the specific character and manner of the 
victim's death was either: (1) within the  risk of which 
defendant was aware; or, (2) if not, then not “too remote, 
accidental in its occurrence, or dependent on another's 
volitional act to have a just bearing” on defendant's 
liability or the gravity of his offense. N.J.S.A. 2C:2–3c; 
Martin, supra,
 119 N.J. at 12, 573 A.2d [at 1364]. 
Id. at 1098 (Albin, J., dissenting) (emphasis in original). 
We  adopt  the  reasoning   of  the  dissent  in  Pelham.   To 
hold  as  a  matter  of  law  that  the  removal  of  life  support  cannot 
constitute  an  intervening  cause  ruling  interferes  with  the  role 
of  the  jury  in  finding  the  essential  element  of  causation.   See 
id.  at  1098  (Albin,  J.,  dissenting)  (“The  majority  holds,  in 
essence,  that  the  risk  that  a  victim  will  elect  to  reject  or 
terminate  some  life-sustaining  measure  as  a  result  of  his 
injuries  is,  as  a  matter  of  law,  within  the  risk  of  which 
defendants  are  aware.   I  part  with  the  majority  on  this  point.  
Whether  defendant  was  aware  of  the  risk  was  a  question  for  the 
jury.”).   Moreover,  we  agree  that 
[i]n making no allowance for the varied circumstances in 
which life support may be terminated by a victim, the 
majority does not permit the jury to consider the level of 
medical assistance required to sustain life, for example, 
whether the medical regimen is so burdensome as to deny even 
a minimal quality of life, or is relatively benign in 
comparison. The nature and scope of the medical care and 
the quality of life of the victim are factors that should be 
considered along with remoteness in determining whether 
intervening circumstances — the voluntary termination of 
life support — should have a just bearing on the outcome of 
the case. 
46           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
     
         
         
          
           
           
           
          
          
           
        
        
    
  IV. CONCLUSION 
         
            
           
               
    
        
          
         
 Id. at 1100 (Albin, J., dissenting). 
In adopting this analysis, we in no way diminish the 
importance of the right to refuse medical treatment as provided 
in Chapter 327E. However, we cannot infringe on a defendant’s 
right in a criminal case to have the jury determine causation, an 
element of the crime, beyond a reasonable doubt. The choices of 
patients or their families do not affect that right. This is 
particularly so when, as was the case here, there was evidence 
suggesting that the prognosis for the victim was uncertain at the 
time the life support was discontinued. We at once respect the 
difficult, highly personal, and protected decision made by Higa’s 
family while recognizing our responsibility to ensure that Abella 
receives a fundamentally fair trial.19 
For  the  above  reasons,  we  hold  that  the  trial  court 
should  have  instructed  the  jury  on  intervening  causation  pursuant 
to  HRS  §§  702-215  and  702-216,  and  its  failure  to  do  so  was 
“prejudicially  insufficient,”  requiring  a  new  trial.   Nichols, 
111  Hawai i  at  334,  141   P.3d  at  981.20 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate
 the ICA’s May 7, 
19 We note that on remand, a jury might well come to the same 
verdict, and nothing in this decision should be read to foreclose that 
possibility. But that must be a decision left to the jury. Pelham, 824 A.2d 
at 1100 (Albin, J., dissenting). 
20 The circuit court should be mindful of administering jury 
instructions consistent with this opinion such that the jury is informed 
whether the causation instructions discussed herein apply to a lesser-included 
offense. 
47           *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
   
   
         /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 2019  judgment  on  appeal  and  vacate  the  circuit  court’s 
December  16,  2015  judgment  of  conviction.   The  case  is  remanded 
to  the  circuit  court  for  proceedings  consistent  with  this 
opinion.  
Dana  S.   Ishibashi 
for  petitioner /s/ Paula
 A. Nakayama 
Chad  M.   Kumagai  
(Brandon  H.  Ito 
on  the  brief) 
for  respondent /s/ Sabrina
 S. McKenna 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson 
48 