 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-12-0000741 24-FEB-2015 
09:45 AM 
---o0o---
CHRISTIE ADAMS, Petitioner/Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
CDM MEDIA USA, INC., Respondent/Defendant-Appellee. 
SCWC-12-0000741 
(CAAP-12-0000741; CIV. NO. 11-1-0931) 

February 24, 2015 
McKENNA AND POLLACK, JJ., AND CIRCUIT JUDGE ALM, IN PLACE OF
ACOBA, J., RECUSED, WITH RECKTENWALD, C.J., CONCURRING AND
DISSENTING, WITH WHOM NAKAYAMA, J., JOINS 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
I. Background 
Christie Adams (Adams) filed a complaint in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court) alleging that 
she had been subjected to employment discrimination in violation 
of Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-2. 
The discriminatory  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
act claimed by Adams was CDM Media, USA, Inc.’s (CDM) decision 
not to hire Adams due to her age. CDM’s motion for summary judgment was granted by the circuit court on the basis that Adams had failed to demonstrate that CDM’s reasons for not 
hiring her were pretextual. In a summary disposition order, the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) affirmed the holding of the circuit court, and Adams sought review of the ICA judgment in this court. 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that summary 
judgment was improperly granted as CDM did not satisfy its burden to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for declining to hire Adams, and therefore pretext was not required 
to be considered by the circuit court. Accordingly, we vacate 
the judgments of the ICA and the circuit court and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
A. Employment action and HCRC decision 
On January 12, 2009, CDM published an online 
solicitation seeking applicants for its International Media Sales Executives positions. CDM described the International Media Sales Executive position as “an inside [telephone] sales person job that . . . requires 200 to 250 cold calls a day.” The relevant portions of the advertisement stated as follows: 
We’re looking for motivated, hungry people to join our ever
expanding sales team in the role of advertising sales. We offer recognized training to build upon your formaleducation/experience and teach you the business of 
- 2 -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
advertising and summit sales in order for you to progress
and build your career quickly. 
We offer great base salary, health/dental insurance and
very attractive bonus scheme to ensure we have a high levelof achievers applying (Realistic OTE 1st year- $70K). 
The heart of CDM Media is based on a commitment to 
innovation, so if you are looking for a business
environment that’s conducive to creativity and challenge,please inquire about this unique advertising salesopportunity. 
Here are a few key benefits to working at CDM Media:
	 Competitive starting salary + aggressive commission and
bonus package (Realistic first year OTE 70k)
	 First-class Sales Training Program from the best in the
industry
  Lucrative sales prizes for top-performers
  Generous paid time off programs  Comprehensive training
sessions 
  Health/Dental benefits
  Career development opportunities
  Referral bonuses for bringing in new sales talent
  Being a contributor to REAL growth 
Requirements

 Sales experience preferred
  Detail-oriented and organized
  Strong communication skills
 Willingness to take on new challenges
  MOST IMPORTANTLY , a true determination to succeed!  
(Emphasis in original). On February 11, 2009, a local newspaper 
posted a story stating that CDM was looking to hire “energetic and driven professionals” and was planning to put them “through an eight-week comprehensive training course.” Adams saw this article and online advertisements related to the position.
1   
CDM’s hiring procedure at the time was as follows: 
1 Adams also saw online advertisements that stated CDM was seeking
“youthful” employees. Adams submitted these advertisements in response to
CDM’s Motion for Summary Judgment. CDM denied placing such advertisements.The circuit court found the advertisements to be inadmissible hearsay. 
- 3 -
 
 
 
 
 
On February 13, 2009, Adams sent an email to CDM Human Resources 
Director, Brandon Bera (Bera), applying for the position. The 
email included a list of awards Adams won while working for 
Verizon in Hawai ʻi, which included awards for “inside/telephone” 
sales and “outside” sales and at least one award exclusively for 
telephone sales: 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
a. Brandon Bera, CDM HR Director, calls all applicants
to speak for a 5 minute phone screening with very basic
questions regarding what interested them about CDM Media.
It is then determined who will be brought in for a first
round face-to-face interview. 
b. Brandon Bera, CDM HR Director, hosts the first round
of interviews and reviews all candidates that came in for 
the interview and narrows down the list of potential
candidates to meet with the CEO, Glenn Willis. This is meant to be an interview focusing on experience,personality, characteristics, professional appearance ofthe candidate, and to determine if they seem like team
players. Usually, there are hundreds of applicants that
are narrowed down to around 4-5 dozen that will be met in person. 
c. Those select few that stick out from the first round 
interview are then moved on to the second round where they
will meet with CDM’s CEO, Glenn Willis, and often timesCDM’s VP of Sales, Nick Backhouse in the same day. This is meant to focus on more in-depth personality characteristicsto and detailed questions about experience to make sure
what was said in the first interview aligns to the second
interview. 
d. Those that impress all parties involved in the hiring
process (CDM’s CEO and President Glenn Willis, HR Director
Brandon Bera and sometimes Sales Vice President/Director
Nick Backhouse if reassurance is needed) are then made an
offer within a couple weeks of the final interview. 
President’s Award for Professional Salesmanship, Premise
Sales Representative, for the Calendar Year 2000 This award 
is presented to the top outside sales representative (of
about 23 outside sales reps) in Verizon Information
Services’ Honolulu Division based 80% on customer growthand 20% on customer satisfaction. 
Hall of Fame Award for the Calendar Year 2000 One of the 
most coveted and prestigious of all Verizon sales awards,this award is presented to 
outside and telephone sales 
- 4 -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
representatives who achieve a net increase of 25% for two
consecutive years. . . . 
1999-2000 Silver Prize Tip [sic] Winner to Montreal and 
Quebec City, Canada During the one-year period of the
contest, winning sales representatives must achieve a
minimum of 115% to sales net goal performance and a minimumof 100% to performance selling items on superpages.com
,
must participate in at least one Quality Improvement Team(QIT), and must have an error percentage less than 1/2 ofone percent of all advertising revenue handled. Of about 23
telephone  sales reps and 23 outside sales reps, I was the
only sales rep in the Hawaii Division to win this prize
trip, which was based upon meeting all four goals in the
Hawaii marketplace. 
Top Producer, Premise Sales Reps, Kauai 2000 TelephoneDirectory Canvass For 195.51% performance to goal (of about
23 outside sales reps). 
ZEAM Award for the Calendar Year 1999 This award is 
presented to sales reps who achieved or exceeded their
annual sales goal with zero errors or mistakes over a one-
year period of time. . . . 
Top Producer, Telephone Sales Reps, Big Island 1999
Telephone Directory Canvass For 217% performance to goal
(from about 23 telephone sales reps).  
Eagle Award, 1999 This award is given to sales
representatives who perform at 100% or higher consistentlyfor 26 weeks in a row. 
(Underlining added). On February 18, 2009, Bera had a five-
minute phone call with Adams. After the call, Adams sent Bera another email, this one including Adams’ professional resume and 
a list of her computer, clerical, and office skills, which 
stated Adams had “used computers on a daily basis for the past 25 years.” 
The resume attached to this second email stated that 
Adams had “[m]ore than 20 years of full-time, hands-on experience in nearly all aspects of sales and marketing, including inside and outside sales.” Adams had received a B.A. 
- 5 -

 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
from Stanford University and “complet[ed] additional college 
courses taken in Switzerland and at the University of Hawai ʻi at 
Manoa.” 
Adams’ resume indicated that from 1984 to 1986, she 
was the Executive Director of The Hawai ʻi Society/The American 
Institute of Architects, where she managed the affairs of the 
550-member non-profit. From 1986 to 1998, Adams was the President of Christie Adams & Associates Marketing and Public Relations, where she worked directly with many clients, including owners of businesses, executives of nonprofits and 
governmental managers, to develop public relations programs and 
organize special events. From September 1998 to 2003, Adams worked for Verizon selling advertising in Verizon’s print and online Yellow Pages, contacting customers in person and by phone. While working at Verizon, Adams won the sales achievement awards described in her email to Bera. 
From May 2004 to September 2004, Adams was a Loan 
Officer with Hawaii HomeLoans where she met with prospective 
home loan clients “over the phone and/or in person.” Lastly, 
from October 1, 2004, to May 15, 2007, Adams’ resume lists her as a “Caregiver for Terminally-ill parent” and, from August 2007 to August 2008, as a “Home Organizer for the Lillian B. Adams Trust.” 
- 6 -
 
 
 
                                                 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
On or about February 19, 2009, Adams was interviewed 
in person by Bera. On the date of the interview Adams was 59 
years old. As described by Adams, “[a]t the end of the interview I asked Bera what the next step would be and he seemed 
hesitant to pass me along for the next interview. He said Glenn 
Willis would decide.” Glenn Willis (Willis) was the President and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of CDM at the time. The only notes from the interview were notations made on an attachment to Adams’ first email, one of which was a box drawn around “Verizon/Yellow Pages” with the words “1/2 inside” and “1/2 outside” written beside it.
2 
Adams was not asked to return for the second interview 
and received no other contact from CDM until March 1, 2009. On that date, Adams received a rejection letter from CDM. On March 30, 2009, CDM hired four persons for the position sought by Adams, who ranged in age from 24 to 38. On May 15, 2009, CDM hired three more persons for the position, ranging in age from 23 to 40. By October 19, 2009, only the two youngest of the new hires were still employed by CDM.
3 
2 CDM admitted that the notes on Adams’ February 13, 2009 email
were “handwritten notes relating to the interview.” 
3 CDM included in its Respondent’s Answer to Charge of
Discrimination Filed on August 27, 2009 to the HCRC a list of all employees
hired around the time Adams was interviewed and a list of “current employees.” 
- 7 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
On August 27, 2009, Adams filed a Charge of 
Discrimination against CDM with the Hawai ʻi Civil Rights 
Commission (HCRC). In her submission to HCRC, Adams stated, “I 
believe that if not for my age I would have been hired for the International Media Sales Executive position.” CDM filed “Respondent’s Answer to Charge of Discrimination Filed on August 27, 2009” (Answer). The Answer stated, inter alia, that sales 
executives in the position for which Adams applied made “200 to 
250 cold calls a day” and that one criteria CDM used to evaluate candidates was whether or not they had “[e]xperience in dealing with VP and C-level executives in Fortune 500 organizations.” The Answer also included a list of all employees hired around the time Adams was interviewed and a list of “current employees.” On February 9, 2011, the HCRC issued a Notice of Dismissal and Right to Sue Letter. 
B. Circuit Court 
On May 10, 2011, Adams filed a complaint in the 
circuit court. The complaint alleged that CDM had violated HRS § 378-2 by discriminating against Adams due to her age. Adams alleged CDM posted advertisements seeking applicants who were 
“youthful” and “recent college graduates.” Adams claimed she 
was entitled to loss of income because she was not hired as a result of discrimination and “was not able to become employed for a long period of time despite her efforts to find 
- 8 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
employment.” Adams requested an order that CDM hire her, and 
she also sought general damages, special damages (such as lost wages, punitive damages, and litigation costs), and attorney’s fees, as well as other appropriate relief. 
On June 20, 2011, CDM filed an answer to the 
complaint. CDM denied that Adams was qualified for the position, denied placing any ads for “youthful” people or “recent college graduates” to join its sales team, and denied that Adams was not hired because CDM “was advertising for ‘youthful’ applicants and ‘recent college graduates.’” 
On February 21, 2012, CDM filed a motion for summary 
judgment (MSJ). 
CDM claimed it was “entitled to summary 
judgment on [Adams’] age discrimination claim because the record lacked substantial evidence that either: (1) Adams was qualified for the sales position, or (2) CDM Media’s reasons for not hiring Adams for the sales position were a pretext for age discrimination.” The only relevant document attached to the MSJ is a declaration from Willis (Willis’ Declaration or Declaration). In his Declaration, Willis states that it was his decision not to hire Adams in February 2009. Willis declares it 
was his “belief” that Adams was not qualified for the position. 
Willis also states that he “did not consider any criteria stated in
 any advertising or posting in making my decision not to hire” 
Adams. (Emphasis added). 
- 9 -

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
The content of Willis’ Declaration is as follows: 
1.	 I am the President and CEO of CDM Media USA, Inc. 
2.	 CDM Media provides business to business technology
marketing services. In particular, it provides globalmarketing assistance to information technology
executives from Fortune 1000 companies by way of (1)
web products, (2) interactive media campaigns, (3)workshops and (4) a variety of invitation-only customtechnology marketing events. All of these products areaimed at an audience of C-Level corporate executives
(for example CEOs, CIOs and CFOs) with information
technology responsibility for their companies. 
3.	 I decided not to hire Plaintiff Christie Adams in February of 2009. 
4.	 The inside sales person job that Ms. Adams applied for
involves cold calling C-Level executives of Fortune
1,000 companies responsible for information technology,can be tedious and requires a team player. 
5.	 It was my belief that [Adams] was not qualified for thejob because: 
a.	 She had no sales experience in the prior fiveyears; 
b.	 As far as I understood, most of her recent(previous 10-15 years) sales experience was inpublishing and/or selling phone book advertising
which incorporated outside sales and face to face
communication; 
c.	 As far as I understood, she had little or nosales experience that involved selling to C-Levelcorporate executives of Fortune 1,000 companies;
and 
d.	 I was advised that she had said that she disliked 
tedious work.
[4] 
6.	 The company did not hire any younger applicants withequal or lower qualifications for the position. 
7.	 
I was not involved in creating, reviewing or approvingany advertising or posting for the position for which[Adams] applied, nor was I aware of the content of suchadvertising or posting, and 
I did not consider any
criteria stated in any advertising or posting in making
my decision not to hire [Adams]. 
Adams disputed making such a statement. 
- 10 -
4  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
(Emphases added). 
Citing to Willis’ Declaration, CDM argued the record 
lacked substantial evidence of Adams’ qualification for the 
position. 
CDM made four arguments to establish that Adams was 
not qualified: (1) Adams had no sales experience in the five years prior to applying for the CDM position; (2) “very little of what Adams did more than five years before she applied for the
 inside sales job at CDM Media had anything to do with that 
job, because she spent much of her time before her more than five year hiatus as an outside sales person”; (3) Adams’ “prior sales experience did not involve selling to C-level executives of Fortune 1,000 companies”; and (4) “the work at CDM Media can 
be tedious” and Adams had expressed a dislike of tedious work. 
CDM maintained that it was justified in considering recent sales experience as an important job qualification because Adams had “no relevant work experience” “that [was] sufficient ground to hold that she was not qualified for the sales position.” 
CDM argued further that Adams failed to establish that 
CDM’s reasons for not hiring her were a “pretext” for discrimination. 
CDM contended that to establish pretext, Adams 
must show that CDM’s explanation was “unworthy of belief,” “a dishonest explanation,” or “deceit used to cover one’s tracks.” CDM claimed that “Willis’ honest belief in the reasons he had for deciding that Adams was not qualified prevents Adams from 
- 11 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
showing pretext.” CDM also claimed that “[n]o one who was hired 
was similarly unqualified.” Even if CDM misjudged Adams’ qualifications, CDM contended that it had discretion in making hiring decisions and “[i]n order to overcome this discretion, 
Adams would have to show that she was ‘clearly superior’ or 
‘significantly’ or ‘markedly’ better than chosen candidates.” CDM argued that Adams made no such claims. 
On June 27, 2012, Adams filed a memorandum in 
opposition to the MSJ. Adams attached a declaration to her submission, stating “I had provided Bera with sufficient information of my qualifications before and during the phone interview to set up an in-person interview, and at the in-person 
interview.” 
Adams noted, “CDM did not state that job applicants 
needed to be currently employed in sales.” Adams represented 
that none of the “online classified ads placed by Defendant for employees that I saw” mentioned that the position required sales experience selling to C-Level corporate executives of Fortune 1,000 companies. Likewise, Adams declared this “area of expertise” was not “mentioned to me during my telephone interview by Bera, nor during my in-person interview with Bera.” 
Adams also declared that, contrary to Willis’ 
statement, her sales experience in the ten to fifteen years prior to the interview was not limited to outside, face-to-face sales of printed phone book advertising, but also included 
- 12 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
“online, selling websites and links for customers,” as well as 
“print and online advertising full-time in an inside sales position over the phone from September of 1998 to about May of 2000, when our management promoted me into outside sales.” 
Adams stated that she possessed twenty-five years of “computer 
experience” at the time of the interview. 
Adams additionally set forth in her declaration that 
she “previously had dealt with many high-level executives dating back to my first full-time job in 1974.” 
Adams stated, “[e]ven 
though I was well qualified for the position, was a top sales associate when employed by the yellow pages, had won numerous sales awards there, and had traveled all over the world, I feel 
that CDM did not hire me because I was not 
‘young’ enough for 
CDM Media.” 
In Adams’ memorandum in opposition, she argued first 
that it was “obviously not true” that she was unqualified for 
the job as she “was highly qualified for the job due to her experience in sales.” 
Adams maintained that “the job did not 
require sales experience,” and thus the argument that Adams did not have the required sales experience is “pure pretext to cover 
age discrimination.” Adams also denied stating that she did not 
like tedious work. 
On June 29, 2012, CDM filed a reply. CDM contended 
that Willis’ Declaration supported the fact that CDM had 
- 13 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
“presented evidence that it did not hire younger applicants than 
Adams who had qualifications equal to or lower than hers.” CDM maintained that Adams presented no admissible evidence “that any person CDM Media hired is younger and/or equally or less 
qualified than Adams.” 
On July 5, 2012, a hearing was held on the MSJ. 
The 
court explained that “the question in the Court’s mind boiled 
down to the third prong of the McDonnell Douglas  test.” The 
court’s view was that Adams had not raised a genuine issue of material fact with regard to pretext. 
Adams responded that she did not need to prove pretext 
because CDM had not satisfied its burden of showing that it had 
legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons not to hire Adams. 
CDM 
replied that the five-year gap in Adams’ work experience was a 
sufficient nondiscriminatory reason not to hire Adams. Adams’ counsel countered that the five-year gap was irrelevant because Adams “was a good, an excellent, a terrific, a fantastic salesperson. . . .” Counsel noted, “[y]ou know, this is not rocket science. You get on the phone. You have a very good personality. You know what the script is to talk to people 
about, which is provided by the company. So how does that have 
any relationship to a decision not to hire her?” 
Adams maintained that CDM’s contention that she said 
she did not like “tedious” work was not only false but was also 
- 14 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
“created to substantiate their pretext for not hiring her.” 
Adams argued that although Willis stated the job required a “team player,” “he didn’t say anything about why [Adams was] not a team player.” 
In response to the court’s specific inquiry into what 
Adams’ arguments were concerning pretext, Adams argued the following: (1) the contentions that she did not have sales experience for five years or experience calling C-level executives were both pretext for discrimination because the posted job advertisements did not state that sales experience or experience in calling executives was required; (2) the “tedious work” comment was clearly a material issue of fact as anyone who 
heard such a comment would not hire a person for the job, and 
Willis based his decision on that comment; and (3) no evidence was presented that Adams was not a team player. Adams concluded that material issues of fact existed and that summary judgment was inappropriate. 
The circuit court orally ruled that, under McDonnell 
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), Adams had made a prima facie case of discrimination: “This Court, under the 
pertinent McDonnell Douglas test . . . concludes that the 
plaintiff did meet their initial burden of establishing the prima facie showing.” Thus, the burden shifted to the employer, and “[t]he employer, based on the paper submitted to the Court, 
- 15 -

 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
did establish legitimate nondiscriminatory reason [sic] for not 
hiring the plaintiff.” The circuit court concluded that Adams “did not raise triable issues of material fact as to the employer’s reason that the non-hiring was pretextual.” 
Concerning the “tedious work” comment, the circuit 
court ruled “there may be a material – there may be a disputed fact there. 
But in this Court[’s] view, that alone is not 
enough to meet plaintiff’s burden, once we hit the third prong of the 
McDonnell Douglas  test.” 
Concerning Adams’ argument that the persons hired 
instead of Adams “had no sales experience, or sales experience that was less than that of the plaintiff,” the circuit court 
ruled “all that’s submitted in support of that assertion is her 
own declaration.” 
The circuit court viewed that evidence as 
“not admissible.” Accordingly, the circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of CDM. 
The circuit court did not make separate findings of 
fact and conclusions of law. The July 24, 2012 Order Granting Defendant’s Motion for Summary Judgment Filed February 21, 2012, affirmed the circuit court’s oral ruling. 
[T]he [circuit court] finds and orders as follows: 
That [Adams] has met her burden of showing a prima facie
case of age discrimination. That [CDM] has met its burdento articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for nothiring [Adams]. That the burden therefore shifted to 
[Adams] to demonstrate [CDM’s] reasons were perpetual.
That [Adams] failed to raise a genuine issue of materialfact as to whether [CDM’s] reasons were pretextual. That 
- 16 -
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
[CDM’s MSJ] should therefore be granted and [Adams’]
Complaint dismissed. 
Also on July 24, 2012, the circuit court entered its final 
judgment in favor of CDM. On August 23, 2012, Adams filed a 
timely notice of appeal to the ICA. 
C. Appeal to the ICA 
On December 26, 2012, Adams filed her Opening Brief 
with the ICA contending that the trial court erred in granting 
summary judgment in favor of CDM . Adams requested the ICA 
reverse the circuit court’s decision and remand for trial. 
Adams first argued that “CDM did not meet its initial 
burden of establishing a legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
justification for not hiring [Adams].” Adams contended that Willis’ statements concerning CDM not hiring any younger, equally or less qualified individuals than Adams, and “Adams did not have enough sales experience for the job,” “are conclusory 
statements not supported by evidence.” Adams maintained that 
she had no “duty to rebut these statements until the statements themselves had been properly supported by evidence.” Adams also maintained that “Willis’ conclusory statements that Adams didn’t measure up should have been supported by the resumes of the individuals who were hired.” 
On April 15, 2013, CDM filed its Answering Brief. CDM 
reasserted its contention that Adams was not qualified for the 
position. CDM argued that Adams “[i]n particular, [] failed to 
- 17 -
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
establish the second element for a prima facie case, i.e., that 
she was qualified for the position for which she applied.” CDM maintained that it had articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for not hiring Adams. Relying on 
Willis’ Declaration, CDM maintained the legitimate reason was 
that: 
Willis decided that [Adams] was not qualified for the job
because [Adams] had no sales experience in the prior five
years. Willis understood that [Adams’] recent sales
experience (the previous 10-15 years) was in publishing andselling phone book advertising which involved outside salesand face to face communication. Willis understood [Adams]had little or no sales experience that involved selling to
C-level executives of Fortune 1,000 companies. Willis was 
advised that [Adams] said that she disliked tedious work. 
Furthermore, CDM argued it “was entitled to use subjective 
hiring criteria.” CDM maintained that “contrary to [Adams’] contentions, CDM does not have the burden of proving that the persons it hired were more qualified than [Adams].” CDM argued that it could “appropriately consider factors not listed in the advertisement” in making hiring decisions. 
D. ICA decision 
On October 18, 2013, the ICA issued its Summary 
Disposition Order (SDO). The ICA held that CDM stated a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for not hiring Adams, pursuant to McDonnell Douglas. The ICA found that “Adams did 
not produce persuasive, admissible evidence that CDM’s reasons were pretextual and thus failed to satisfy her burden under 
McDonnell Douglas.” Thus, the ICA affirmed the circuit court’s 
- 18 -
 
 
  IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the July 24, 2012
Final Judgment granting the July 24, 2012 “Order Granting
Defendant’s Motion For Summary Judgment Filed February 21,2012” is affirmed. 
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
rulings. Aside from the introductory paragraphs, the ICA’s 
decision was as follows: 
Adams was 59 years old when CDM declined her application to
a sales position in their Honolulu office. CDM stated that its decision was based on Adams’ lack of recent and relevant work experience in inside sales to high level
corporate executives in Fortune 1,000 companies. By
articulating this “legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason”for refusing to hire Adams, CDM satisfied its burden underthe pertinent McDonnell Douglas test for age
discrimination. Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc. , 94 Hawai ʻi 368,
378, 14 P.3d 1049, 1059 (2000) (citing 
McDonnell Douglas
Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973)); (holding modified by
Hazen Paper Co. v. Biggins, 507 U.S. 604 (1993)); and(holding modified by Wilmot v. Forest City Auto Parts, 2000WL 804616 (Ohio Ct. App. Jun. 22, 2000)). Adams did not 
produce persuasive, admissible evidence that CDM’s reasons
were “pretext” and thus failed to satisfy her burden under
McDonnell Douglas. Shoppe, 90 Hawai ʻi at 378-79, 14 P.3d at
1059-60. Accordingly, the circuit court concluded that
Adams “did not raise triable issues of material fact as to 
[CDM’s reasons for not hiring her]” and granted summaryjudgment for CDM. 
Therefore, 
Adams v. CDM Media USA, Inc., No. CAAP-12-0000741, 2013 WL 
5707278 (App. Oct. 18, 2013) (SDO). The ICA issued its final judgment on November 21, 2013. 
E. Application for Writ of Certiorari 
On December 23, 2013, Adams filed her Application for 
Writ of Certiorari (Application).
5 Adams presented two questions 
for decision: 
5 CDM did not file a response to the Application. 
- 19 -
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
A. Whether the [ICA] committed a grave error of law or
fact in affirming the Circuit Court grant of summary
judgment? 
B. Whether the decision of the [ICA] contains
inconsistencies with those of this court of a magnitude
dictating the need for further appeal? 
Adams maintains, inter alia, that “CDM failed to meet 
its initial burden of establishing a legitimate 
nondiscriminatory justification for not hiring Adams.” Adams contends that the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to her, “leads to the conclusion that Willis did not even make the decision not to hire Adams.” Adams argues that “it was actually Bera who decided not to hire Adams as it would have been impossible for Willis to hire Adams without having interviewed her.”
6 Adams requests that this court review the 
ICA’s affirmation of the circuit court’s decision. 
II. Standard of Review 
“We review a circuit court’s award of summary judgment 
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court.” 
Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc. , 94 Hawai ʻi 368, 376, 14 P.3d 1049, 
1057 (2000) (alteration omitted) (quoting Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki 
6 Adams argues further that, under a “cat’s paw theory,” even if
Willis was the ultimate decision-maker and held no discriminatory animus
toward Adams, she could still prove discrimination by CDM if the ultimate
adverse employment action was influenced or motivated in some way by the biasof an employee, such as Bera, who contributed to the decision. Adams arguesthat “to establish a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for rejecting Adams’application, CDM was required to submit a declaration by Bera explaining why
he did not forward Adams[’] application on to Willis for further review.”
Thus, Adams concludes this failure to establish a lack of discriminatoryanimus on the part of Bera was sufficient reason to deny summary judgment infavor of CDM. 
- 20 -
 
 
 
   
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Beachcomber Inv. Co. , 74 Haw. 85, 104, 839 P.2d 10, 22 (1992)). 
“[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party 
is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” 
Id. “A fact is 
material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.” Id. 
“[T]he evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Id. 
III. Discussion 
A. HRS Chapter 378 and the Shoppe-McDonnell test 
HRS § 378-2(1)(A) (1999) states, “It shall be an 
unlawful discriminatory practice: [] Because of . . . age . . . [f]or any employer to refuse to hire . . . any individual.”
7 
In enacting Revised Laws of Hawai ʻi (RLH) § 90A-1 
(1963), the precursor to HRS § 378-2, HRS Tables of Disposition, 
7	 HRS § 378-2(1)(A) (1999) states in full: 
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: 
(1)
 Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age,
religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital status, or
arrest and court record: 
(A) For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar
or discharge from employment, or otherwise to discriminateagainst any individual in compensation or in the terms,conditions, or privileges of employment . . . . 
- 21 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
at 8 (1968), the legislature stated that the purpose of the bill 
was 
to protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all
persons to seek, obtain, and hold employment or membershipin a labor organization without discrimination orabridgement on account of race, sex, age, religion, color
or ancestry. It is not the intent of this bill to tell an 
employer whom to hire, but to 
declare it to be unlawful for
an employer to refuse to employ, or to discharge fromemployment, any individual because of race, sex, age,religion, color or ancestry, nor is it the intent of this
bill to interfere with management or an employer’s
prerogative to select the best qualified person for anygiven position in accordance with established occupationalqualifications that are applied equally to all persons. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 573, in 1963 Senate Journal, at 866 
(emphases added) (hereinafter 1963 Senate Journal); see1963 Haw. 
Sess. Laws Act 180, § 1 at 223. The purpose of the bill is to 
“afford[s] all persons equal opportunities in employment . . . , with the qualifications of the applicants being the sole test in selecting employees.” 1963 Senate Journal at 866. 
HRS Chapter 378 endorses an employer’s authority to 
decline to hire employees based on legitimate job qualifications. 
That chapter does not “[p]rohibit an employer 
. . . from refusing to hire . . . any individual for reasons 
relating to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question.” HRS § 378-3(3) (Supp. 1999) (emphasis added). Therefore, when hiring employees, an employer may consider any reason related to the ability of an individual to perform the work in question, but the employer is not permitted, subject to 
- 22 -

 
                                                 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
exceptions not relevant to this case,8 from considering age, as 
well as the other categories set forth in HRS § 378-2(1). 
A plaintiff can prove age discrimination “by adducing 
circumstantial evidence of discrimination.”9 Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi 
at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059. When analyzing a claim of age 
discrimination relying on circumstantial evidence, this court has set forth a three-step analysis, modifying the test adopted 
in
 McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,  411 U.S. 792 (1973). 
Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378-79, 14 P.3d at 1059-60. “First, the 
plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of discrimination by demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, the following 
four elements: (1) that plaintiff is a member of a protected class; (2) that plaintiff is qualified for the position for which plaintiff has applied . . . ; (3) that plaintiff has 
8 HRS § 378-3 provides, inter alia, that, the provisions of Part 1
of HRS Chapter 378 will not: repeal any law, prevent employers from
establishing “bona fide occupational qualifications,” affect the operation ofretirement plans, prohibit religious organizations from preferringindividuals of the same religion, conflict with security regulations of theUnited States or the State, require unreasonable structural changes or
expensive equipment alterations to accommodate a person with a disability,
prohibit schools from considering criminal convictions, prohibit financialinstitutions from considering any criminal offense involving dishonesty or abreach of trust, preclude any employee from bringing a civil action forsexual harassment or sexual assault, or require an employer to accommodate
the needs of a nondisabled person associated with a person with a disability.
See HRS § 378-3. 
9 “Because an employer who discriminates is unlikely to leave a
smoking gun attesting to a discriminatory intent . . . a victim of
discrimination is seldom able to prove his claim by direct evidence, and is
usually constrained to rely on circumstantial evidence.” McMillan v. 
Examination Mgmt. Servs., Inc.,  No. 94 CIV. 2229 LAP, 1996 WL 551725
(S.D.N.Y.
 Sept. 27, 1996) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
- 23 -
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
suffered some adverse employment action . . . ; and (4) that the 
position still exists.”10 Id. at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059. 
In the second step, “[o]nce the plaintiff establishes 
a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden of production 
shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action.” Id. “The employer’s explanation must be in the form of 
admissible evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment action.” Id. 
“Although the burden of production is 
shifted to the employer, the ultimate burden of persuading the 
trier of fact that the employer intentionally discriminated 
against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff.” Id. at 378-79, 14 P.3d at 1059-60 (alteration omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs 
v. Burdine,
 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981)). 
In the third step, “if the employer rebuts the prima 
facie case, the burden reverts to the plaintiff to demonstrate 
10 The fourth element of the  McDonnell Douglas  prima facie analysis
requires proof “that, after [the complainant’s] rejection, the position
remained open and the employer continued to seek applicants from persons ofcomplainant’s qualifications.” McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S.
792, 802 (1973) (emphasis added). Shoppe does not require the claimant to
provide proof of the qualifications of the applicants that the employer
continued to seek for the position. Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at
1059. 
- 24 -
 
  
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
that the defendant’s proffered reasons were ‘pretextual.’” Id. 
at 379, 14 P.3d at 1060. A plaintiff may establish pretext by 
“persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or . . . by showing that the employer’s 
proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.” Id. 
B. Prima facie case 
In the present case, Adams clearly established a prima 
facie case of discrimination and therefore satisfied the first 
step of the  Shoppe-McDonnell  standard. 
At the hearing on the motion for summary judgment, the 
circuit court made a specific finding that Adams established a prima facie case, thus expressly determining that Adams was qualified for the position. 
“This Court . . . concludes that 
the plaintiff did meet their [sic] initial burden of establishing the prima facie showing.” The court reiterated this finding in the written order granting the MSJ: “the [circuit court] finds and orders as follows: That [Adams] has 
met her burden of showing a prima facie case of age 
discrimination.” 
The record amply demonstrates that Adams clearly 
satisfied all four elements of the first prong of the Shoppe-
McDonnell
 test. In its Answering Brief to the ICA, CDM argued 
that Adams “[i]n particular, [] failed to establish the second element for a prima facie case, i.e., that she was qualified for 
- 25 -
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
the position for which she applied.” CDM did not contest the 
first, third, and fourth requirements of Adams’ prima facie case. 
In any event, establishment of the first, third, and 
fourth elements are beyond dispute. First, Adams was fifty-nine years old at the time when she applied with CDM, so she is part of a protected class.
11 As to the third element, Adams suffered 
an adverse employment action when CDM decided not to hire her. In regard to the fourth element, the position continued to exist after she received a rejection letter on March 1, 2009, because later that year CDM hired seven persons as International Media Sales Executives. 
As to the second element, it is also clear that Adams 
was qualified. CDM argued to the ICA that Adams was not qualified for the position because she did not have recent or relevant sales experience. However, the phone sales position did not require sales experience. 
11 The bill enacting RLH § 90A-1 originally included a specific
prohibition on discrimination in hiring of persons between the ages 40-65,
which was later deleted. H. Stand Comm. Rep. Nos. 31 & 80, in 1963 House
Journal, at 591 & 607; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. Nos. 399 & 810, in 1963 SenateJournal, at 810 & 867. The Senate explained, “The deletion of reference toages 40 to 65 is not to be construed . . . as an avoidance [of] the problemsof our older workers, but rather as an attempt to make discrimination on the
basis of age more inclusive by removing specific limitations.” 1963 Senate 
Journal at 867. While HRS § 378-2(1) does not specify specific agelimitations, Adams’ inclusion as a protected person was not challenged inthis case. 
- 26 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
First, the advertisement CDM posted for the job stated 
that sales experience was “preferred,” but not required. If 
sales experience was a “preference” and not a minimum qualification, then Adams could have had no sales experience and 
she still would have been qualified for the job. 
Second, the hiring solicitation posted by CDM promised 
extensive training. “We offer recognized training to build upon 
your formal education/experience and teach you the business of advertising and summit sales in order for you to progress and build your career quickly.” “Here are a few key benefits of working at CDM Media: . . . First-class Sales Training Program from the best in the industry.” Similarly, newspaper articles 
regarding CDM’s solicitation indicated “[a]ll sales hires will 
go through an eight-week comprehensive training course.” The offer of extensive training underscores the fact that no sales experience was required. 
Moreover, Adams had extensive sales experience. Adams 
owned and operated her own marketing company for twelve years, during which time she “[w]orked directly with owners of businesses, executives of nonprofits and governmental managers.” 
Subsequently, Adams worked for five years with Verizon. During 
that time, Adams worked in both “inside” and “outside” sales. Viewed in the light most favorable to Adams, this fact was specifically recognized by CDM when one of its agents made the 
- 27 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
hand-written notes “1/2 inside” and “1/2 outside” on Adams’ 
first email besides the boxed-in words “Verizon/The Yellow Pages.” While employed as a sales person at Verizon, Adams won at least one award specifically for her inside/telephone sales 
work. In addition, Adams won six other awards, all for 
outperforming her peers and maintaining consistently positive sales results. Adams denied stating that she disliked tedious work, and thus this evidence is not weighed against Adams on summary judgment. Because sales experience was merely “preferred” and Adams had extensive sales experience, Adams was qualified for the position and clearly satisfied the second element of the prima facie test. 
Therefore, because the circuit court made an express 
determination that Adams established a prima facie case, and the evidence in the record, viewed in the light most favorable to Adams, demonstrates that she met the four elements of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell  prima facie test, Adams established a prima 
facie case of age discrimination. 
C. Legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason 
Once Adams established a prima facie case of age 
discrimination, a burden of production shifted to CDM to “articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason” for not 
hiring Adams. Shoppe
, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059. 
- 28 -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
In this case, Willis articulated four reasons in 
paragraph 5 of the Declaration for not hiring Adams:   
5.	 It was my belief that the Plaintiff was not qualified
for the job because:a.	 She had no sales experience in the prior fiveyears;
b.	 As far as I understood, most of her recent(previous 10-15 years) sales experience was inpublishing and/or selling phone bookadvertising which incorporated outside salesand face to face communication; 
c.	 As far as I understood, she had little or nosales experience that involved selling to C-Level corporate executives of Fortune 1,000companies; and
d.	 
I was advised that she had said that she 
disliked tedious work. 
Accordingly, we consider whether Willis’ Declaration articulates 
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. 
1. Defining “legitimate” in the context of HRS Chapter 378 
“Legitimate” is defined as “lawful,” or “genuine.” 
Black’s Law Dictionary  984 (9th ed. 2009). “[A] ‘legitimate’ 
reason must be one that is justifiable in view of the purposes of the [statute].” Hill v. Mississippi State Emp’t Serv., 918 
F.2d 1233, 1243-44 (5th Cir. 1990) (Rubin, J., dissenting). 
In applying the second step of the analysis, “[t]he 
employer’s explanation must be in the form of admissible evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment 
action.” Shoppe
, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059. However, 
- 29 -
 
  
 
   
 
                                                 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
if the employer’s articulated reason is not legitimate (or is 
discriminatory) or if the articulated reason is not in the form of admissible evidence, then the burden of production has not been met.
12 
a. Legislative intent of HRS § 378-2 
Legislative history is a valuable indicator of the 
purpose of a statute. “This court’s primary duty in interpreting and applying statutes is to ascertain and give effect to the legislature’s intention to the fullest degree.” 
Nat’l Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Ferreira, 71 Haw. 341, 345, 790 
P.2d 910, 913 (1990); HRS § 1-15(2) (2009) (“The reason and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it, may be considered to discover its true meaning.”). In interpreting statutes, “t his court ‘must read statutory 
language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.’” Schmidt v. HSC, Inc.
 , 
131 Hawai ʻi 497, 508, 319 P.3d 416, 426 (2014) (emphasis added) 
(quoting Blaisdell v. Dep’t of Pub. Safety , 113 Hawai ʻi 315, 318, 
151 P.3d 796, 799 (2007)). 
The purpose of HRS Chapter 378 is to ensure that 
hiring criteria are “in accordance with established occupational 
12 See HRE Rule 301(3); (defining the “burden of producing evidence”
as the obligation of a party to introduce evidence of the existence or
nonexistence of a relevant fact sufficient to avoid an adverse peremptoryfinding on that fact”); 
see also 
HRE Rule 303(b). 
- 30 -
 
 
 
 
  
   
                                                 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
qualifications that are applied equally to all persons.” 1963 
Senate Journal at 866. When the law was initially enacted as Act 180, section (1)(a) of the law read as follows: 
(1) It shall be unlawful employment practice or unlawful
discrimination: 
(a) 
For an employer to refuse to hire or employ or to
bar or discharge from employment, any individual
because of his race, sex, age, religion, color or
ancestry, provided that an employer may refuse to
hire an individual for good cause relating to theability of the individual to perform the work inquestion . . . . 
See 1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 180, § 1 at 223, codified at RLH 
§ 90A-1, recodified to HRS §§ 378-2 and 378-3 (emphasis 
added).13 
Thus, as enacted, the law explicitly linked the authority to 
refuse to hire or discharge to “good cause relating to the 
ability of the individual to perform the work in question.” As explained by the Senate committee report, specifically referring to section (1)(a) of Act 180, the policy supported by the law was to “afford all persons equal opportunities in employment . . . with the qualifications of the applicants 
being the sole 
test in selecting employees.” 1963 Senate Journal at 866 (emphasis 
added).14 
13 The minority asserts that “the 1963 version [of the statute] was
unclear.” Minority at 25. However, the minority declines to demonstrate the
alleged lack of clarity. 
14 In full, the passage provides as follows: 
This bill does not give minority group members any special
privileges in obtaining employment but afford [sic] allpersons equal opportunities in employment regardless of
race, sex, age, religion, color or ancestry with the
(continued. . .) 
- 31 -
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Section 1(a) of the bill provides in part that an employer
may refuse to hire an individual for good cause relating to
the ability of the person to perform the work in
question[]. An employer may refuse to hire an individual
for justifiable and reasonable cause. In this connection,the employer may, depending on the job, consider thetraining, experience, intelligence, personality andappearance of the applicant where any or all of these
factors are applied equally to all applicants and are
determinative in the selection of the best qualified.
[15] 
Id. at 867 (emphases added) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Chapter 378 therefore does not prohibit an employer from 
refusing to hire an individual for reasons that are applied equally to all applicants and are “relat[ed] to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question.” HRS § 378-3(3) (emphasis added). Thus, a “legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reason” not to hire a person, in view of the purposes and 
statutory provisions of HRS Chapter 378, must be a reason related to the “ability of the individual to perform the work in question.” 
b. Subsequent recodification did not alter the intent of the
legislature 
RLH § 90A-1 was recodified to HRS Chapter 378 in 1981 
and reorganized with the addition of protections for women and government workers. 
1981 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 94, §§ 1-3 at 184-
(. . .continued)
qualifications of the applicants being the sole test in
selecting employees. 
1963 Senate Journal at 866. 
Appearance cannot include color or racial characteristics. 
1963 
Senate Journal at 867. 
- 32 -
15  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
89. Reformation or reenactment of a statute does not alter the 
purpose or intent of a law unless that is the express intent of 
the legislature. Muniz v. Hoffman , 422 U.S. 454, 470 (1975) 
(“It will not be inferred that the legislature, in revising and 
consolidating the laws, intended to change their policy, unless 
such an intention be clearly expressed.” (emphasis added)). 
If a revised statute is ambiguous or susceptible of two
constructions, reference may be made to the prior statute
for the purpose of ascertaining intent. But mere 
differences in words or arrangement should not generate aninference of legislative intent to change the former rule.
A revision will not be construed as altering a particularstatute absent a clear, unmistakable legislative intent. 
 
Le Mars Mut. Ins. Co. of Iowa v. Bonnecroy, 304 N.W.2d 422, 424 
(Iowa 1981) (emphasis added) (citations omitted); see also Pye 
v. State,
 919 A.2d 632, 637 (Md. 2007) (“[A] change in a statute 
as part of a general re-codification will ordinarily not be 
deemed to modify the law unless the change is such that the intention of the Legislature to modify the law is unmistakable.”). 
As stated by the legislature, the purpose of the 1981 
revisions was to “ extend coverage of Part I (Discriminatory 
Practices) of the Employment Practices Act, Chapter 378, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to Employees of the State and county 
governments to help ensure that women are provided equal 
treatment in employment when disabled because of pregnancy-related conditions, and to clarify policies and procedures in the area of enforcement with respect to unlawful or 
- 33 -

 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
discriminatory employment practices.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
549, in 1981 House Journal, at 1166 (emphases added). Thus, the express intent of the 1981 legislature was to expand the safeguards offered by the employment discrimination provision of 
HRS Chapter 378. In contrast, the legislative history does not 
reveal any intention to alter the fundamental purposes of the employment discrimination law or to reduce its protections. Therefore, the 1963 legislative history continues to provide a significant and reliable averment that the purpose of HRS § 378-2 is to “afford all persons equal opportunities in employment . . . with the qualifications of the applicants being the sole test in selecting employees.” 1963 Senate Journal at 866; 
see 
Muniz,
 422 U.S. at 470. 
As recodified, HRS § 378-3(3) preserves the intent of 
the legislature. In the 1981 revision, the legislature shifted language “provid[ing] that an employer may refuse to hire an individual for good cause relating to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question,” 1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 180, § 1 at 223, to “Nothing in this part shall be deemed to . . . [p]rohibit . . . an employer . . . from refusing 
to hire . . . any individual for reasons relating to the ability 
of the individual to perform the work in question.” HRS § 378-3. Thus, following the recodification, the substance of the statute is identical: in 1963 the language provided an exception 
- 34 -
 
   
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
to the prohibition against discriminatory hiring or discharging 
practices and the language continues to do so in the 1981 revision, underscoring the fact that the legislature has provided no indication that the purpose of the statute has been 
altered. 
Nonetheless, the minority maintains that the purpose 
and intent of HRS § 378-2 was transformed based on the 1981 
recodification. 
Minority at 24-25. However, the minority does 
not provide any legislative history to support its contention that the 1981 revision was intended to alter the purpose of HRS Chapter 378. See Minority at 22-26. Thus, the interpretation of the minority must be rejected as the legislature did not 
express any intent to change the policy of the statute. 
Muniz, 
422 U.S. at 470; Le Mars Mut. Ins. Co., 304 N.W.2d at 424 (“A 
revision will not be construed as altering a particular statute absent a clear, unmistakable legislative 
intent.”).16 
16 Although the minority contends the 1963 legislative history is
irrelevant, minority at 26-27 n.6, it nevertheless also disputes the
interpretation of certain passages from the 1963 Senate Journal. Id. The 
minority argues that statements from the journal “that reference thequalifications of the applicant,” “when viewed in context, [] appear to begeneral statements of support for equal opportunity, and not directives to
employers to base their hiring decisions solely on an applicant’s
qualifications.” 
Minority at 26 n.6. Respectfully, the legislature’s
statement that “This bill . . . afford[s] all persons equal opportunities inemployment . . . 
with the qualifications of the applicants being the sole
test in selecting employees,” 1963 Senate Journal at 866 (emphasis added), is
much more than a “general statement of support,” especially when viewed in
conjunction with the specific statutory language adopted by the legislaturein RLH § 90A-1. 1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 180, § 1 at 223, recodified at HRS§§ 378-2 and 378-3. 
- 35 -
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
The minority alternatively argues, “Even if the 
Majority is correct that the purpose of the current statute 
remains the same as the 1963 version,  our plain reading 
interpretation of the current statute is consistent with that 
legislative purpose when viewed in light of the whole 
legislative history.” Minority at 26 (emphasis added). The minority’s argument does not provide the context by which to understand its reference to the “light of the whole legislative history” or provide legislative history that contradicts the 1963 legislature’s intent as described above. Thus, if the purpose of the current statute “remains the same as the 1963 version,” then the minority’s “plain reading interpretation” of 
the current statute is pointedly inconsistent with the “whole 
legislative history.” 
Finally, the minority contends that when the 1963 
legislature made the statement that the qualifications of the applicants shall be 
the sole test in selecting employees,17 “the 
legislature was addressing concerns that the statute might create special preferences (such as hiring quotas) for minorities.” Minority at 26 n.6. The minority does not present 
any authority in support of a legislative concern regarding 
“special preferences.” Surely, the right of individuals 
17 See supra note 14 for the full text of the “sole test” statement. 
- 36 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
protected under HRS § 378-2 to expect that their ability to 
perform the work in question will be the “sole test” in an employment decision, subject to the exceptions of HRS § 378-3, which is not a “special preference” but rather the embodiment of 
the protection that HRS Chapter 378 guarantees. 
c. Principles of statutory construction reinforce the
legislature’s intent 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is 
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the 
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language of the statute itself. 
Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm’n 
of Cnty. of Kauai, 133 Hawai ʻi 141, 163, 324 P.3d 951, 973 
(2014). We must read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
Id. Additionally, “Laws in pari materia, or upon the 
same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each 
other.” 
HRS § 1-16. Further, when construing a statute, courts 
are “bound to give effect to all parts of a statute, and no 
clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all words of the 
statute.” 
Fagaragan v. State , 132 Hawai ʻi 224, 241, 320 P.3d 
889, 906 (2014) (citation and alteration omitted). 
- 37 -

 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
HRS §§ 378-2 and 378-3 both concern lawful employment 
practices. Thus, in order to give effect to HRS § 378-2, the 
prohibitions of that section must be read together with HRS § 378-3. See HRS § 1-16. In HRS § 378-3, the legislature has 
provided a list of eleven specific exceptions to the employment 
discrimination prohibition of HRS § 378-2. For instance, as stated, the legislature permits an adverse employment decision when the reason for that decision is related to the person’s ability to perform the work in question. HRS § 378-3(3). Other exceptions, inter alia, allow religious organizations to give employment preference to individuals of the same religion, HRS § 378-3(5), and exempt employers from having to make 
“unreasonable” structural changes or “expensive” equipment 
alterations to accommodate a person with a disability.
18 HRS § 
378-3(7). 
Statutory lists may be interpreted under the principle 
of expressio unius est exclusio alterius ; i.e., the express 
inclusion of certain items in a statutory list implies the 
exclusion of others and of alternatives. Fagaragan,
 132 Hawai ʻi 
at 242, 320 P.3d at 907. This principle applies equally to a 
statutory list of exceptions; when the legislature has created certain exceptions, “it does not follow that courts have 
18 For a summary of all the exceptions, see supra note 8. 
- 38 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
authority to create others.” United States v. Johnson, 529 U.S. 
53, 58 (2000). 
The “proper inference” from a list of exceptions 
to a statute is that the legislature “considered the issue of 
exceptions and, in the end, limited the statute to the ones set 
forth.” Id.; see also Thurston v. Bishop, 7 Haw. 421, 442 (Haw. 
Kingdom 1888) (“The rule of construction, expressio unius est 
exclusio alterius, then, ought to exclude all other 
exceptions.”). In Hawai ʻi, the principle of expressio unius est 
exclusio alterius  is applicable “where in the natural 
association of ideas the contrast between a specific subject 
matter which is expressed and one which is not mentioned leads to an inference that the latter was not intended to be included within the statute.” Int’l Sav. & Loan Ass’n, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 
Hawaiʻi 197, 201, 921 P.2d 117, 121 (1996). 
Thus, in applying the rule of construction,  expressio 
unius est exclusio alterius, this court looks to the contrast provided by the natural association of ideas expressed in the statutory list. Id. Here, there is a decided contrast between 
the eleven specific exceptions presented by HRS § 378-3 and potential exceptions that are not mentioned. 
For example, there 
is a clear delimitation intended by the legislature’s reference in HRS § 378-3(5) to “religious or denominational institution[s] or organization[s],” such that a contrast is clearly implied that the legislature did not intend that private businesses 
- 39 -
 
alterius,***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
could also give employment preference to individuals who share a 
common religion or denomination. Similarly, the legislature’s use of “unreasonable structural changes or expensive equipment alterations” in HRS § 378-3(7) describes a standard that 
contemplates a clear contrast to reasonable structural changes 
or non-expensive alterations of equipment; thus, it may be inferred that the legislature plainly intended that an alteration involving a minimal or nominal cost may not be asserted as a basis to not hire a person with a disability. 
Accordingly, the contrast between the exceptions 
listed in HRS § 378-3 and those not listed admits the firm conviction that the legislature “considered the issue of 
exceptions and, in the end, limited the statute to the ones set 
forth.” 
Johnson, 529 U.S. at 58. By the same analysis, the 
legislature’s permission to allow an employer to refuse to hire, refer or discharge an individual “for reasons related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question,” HRS § 378-3(3) (emphasis added), implies a clear contrast to reasons that have no relation to the ability to perform the job. Thus, in accordance with the principle of expressio unius est exclusio 
 the exceptions of HRS § 378-3 do not permit an adverse 
employment decision to be based on reasons unrelated to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question. 
- 40 -

 
See***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
The minority offers the criticism that our decision 
treats HRS § 378-3 “as an exclusive list,” and “the legislature 
was merely attempting to ensure that a particular group of key rights remained protected without listing every possible basis 
for an adverse employment decision.” Minority at 23, 27. Under 
the minority’s reasoning, “[n]othing in either [HRS §§ 378-2 or 378-3] tells the employer that it must limit its hiring decisions to reasons related to the ‘ability of the individual to perform the work in question.’” Minority at 23; 
see also 
minority at 25. This analysis is flawed for several reasons. 
First, the treatment of the eleven exceptions provided 
in HRS § 378-3 as an exclusive list is in full accordance with 
the principle of expressio unius est exclusio alterius , based 
upon the self-evident contrast between the eleven exceptions 
prescribed by HRS § 378-3 and unspecified possible exceptions. Johnson, 529 U.S. at 58. Second, if nothing tells the employer that it must limit its hiring decisions to reasons related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question, then “all” nondiscriminatory reasons are permitted. If all nondiscriminatory reasons are permitted, then there would be no 
purpose for an exception involving a subset of nondiscriminatory 
reasons “relating to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question.”  HRS 378-3(3). Thus, the contention of the minority renders the exception provided in HRS § 378-3(3) 
- 41 -

 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
as superfluous, contrary to our duty to give effect to all parts 
of a statute when a construction can be legitimately found that will give force to and preserve all words of the statute. See 
Fagaragan
, 132 Hawai ʻi at 241, 320 P.3d at 906. 
Third, it is 
plain that by construing the exceptions in HRS § 378-3 to have unlimited expansion for “possible bas[es]” not listed by the legislature, the minority’s analysis renders not just HRS § 378
-
3(3), but all non-discriminatory exceptions in HRS § 378-3 as superfluous. The practical effect of a boundless expansion of the bases for exceptions listed in HRS § 378-3 is to eliminate the protections afforded by HRS § 378-2. 
In order to give proper effect to the intention of the 
legislature, HRS § 378-2 must be construed in the context of the entire statute and consistent with its purpose to afford all persons equal opportunities in employment. See 1963 Senate 
Journal at 866. When read to limit lawful adverse employment decisions to those based on reasons related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question, both HRS §§ 378-
2 and 378-3(3) are enforced and preserved, in accordance with the mandate that laws on the same subject “shall be construed with reference to each other.” 
See HRS § 1-16. Further, when 
read in the context of the exceptions provided by HRS § 378-3, the prohibitory language of HRS § 378-2 is consistent with the 
purpose identified in its legislative history “that the 
- 42 -

 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
qualifications of the applicants be[] the sole test in selecting 
employees.” 1963 Senate Journal at 866; see Kauai Springs,  
Inc.
, 133 Hawai ‘i at 163, 324 P.3d at 973. 
d. Requirement of a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason in our
prior decisions 
The requirement that legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reasons for an adverse employment action must pertain to the individual’s inability to perform the work in question is 
supported by our prior analysis of HRS § 378-2. 
In Shoppe, the 
employee, Shoppe, alleged age discrimination when she was 
terminated by her employer, Gucci. Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 381, 14 
P.3d at 1062. The reason articulated by Gucci for firing Shoppe 
was that she was not performing her job in a satisfactory 
manner. Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 374-76, 381, 14 P.3d at 1055-57, 
1062. Shoppe’s supervisor, Perreira, testified that she had 
visited Shoppe’s Maui store and found important inventory documents lying on the floor, which needed to be filled out and 
faxed to the Gucci warehouse on O ʻahu in order for inventory to 
be shipped to Maui that day. Shoppe missed the deadline for 
faxing the papers and had done so numerous times, resulting in Perreira personally reprimanding Shoppe on several occasions for her tardiness. 
Id. 
The reasons Gucci articulated for firing Shoppe were 
therefore related to timely report filing, an important function 
- 43 -

 
 
related to Shoppe’s inability to 
Simmons v. Aqua Hotels & Resorts, Inc., 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
of Shoppe’s position at Gucci. Under these circumstances, the 
Shoppe court found that Gucci had articulated legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons: 
[T]here does not appear to be a genuine issue of fact
regarding Plaintiff’s failure to perform the duties of [a]store manager satisfactorily. Therefore Defendants have 
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for theadverse employment action against Plaintiff. 
Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 381, 14 P.3d at 1062 (emphases added). In 
other words, because the reasons Gucci articulated for the 
adverse employment action were adequately perform the job in question, Gucci articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for firing Shoppe. 
Similarly, in 
130 Hawai ʻi 325, 310 P.3d 1026 (App. 2013), an employee alleged, 
inter alia, age discrimination under HRS § 378-2(1)(A). Id. at 
328, 310 P.3d at 1029. The reasons given by the employer for the adverse employment action was that the employee’s position had been restructured as part of cost-cutting measures following 
bankruptcy.
19 Id. The employee was informed she could apply for 
the restructured position. Id. at 327-28, 309 P.3d at 1028-29. 
The employee declined to apply and the employer hired a 
different person for the new position. Id. The ICA found that 
the employee established a prima facie case of discrimination. 
19 The new position was substantively different, including a new
title, redefined job description, different benefits, reduced salary, and
required relocation to Kaua ʻi. Simmons, 130 Hawai ʻi at 327, 310 P.2d at 1028. 
- 44 -
 
 
                                                 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Id. at 330-31, 309 P.3d at 1031-32. The ICA next found that the 
employer met its burden to produce legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reasons for the adverse employment action because the employer’s restructuring plan eliminated the employee’s original position, 
the job description for the new position had been redefined, and 
the job holder was required to be readily available on-site. 
Id. at 331, 309 P.3d at 1029, 1032. The reasons provided were 
related to a person’s ability to perform the work in question because they defined the requirements of the job. Therefore, the explanation given for the adverse employment action was legitimate because it was related to the ability of the employee to perform the work in 
question.20 
In Dir., Dep’t of Labor & Indus. Relations v. Si-Nor, 
Inc., No. 27497, 2009 WL 405926 (App. Feb. 18, 2009) (mem.), an employee alleged discrimination and a prima facie case of 
discrimination was established.
21 Id. at *8. The Hawai ʻi Labor 
Relations Board (HLRB) found testimony regarding the employee’s 
insubordination and involvement in altercations with others more 
20 The ICA went on to vacate summary judgment in favor of the
employer because it found genuine issues of material fact as to the
employer’s credibility; that is, the plaintiff had raised a material issue asto pretext. “Based on this record, a rational fact-finder could infer that
Defendants’ stated reasons for Plaintiff’s termination lacked credibility and
were pretextual.” 
Id. at 331, 310 P.3d at 1032. 
21 In Si-Nor, it was alleged that the employer discriminated against
the employee for having reported work place safety issues, in violation of
HRS § 396-8(e)(3). Si-Nor, 2009 WL 405926, at *7-*8. The ICA and the Hawai ʻi 
Labor Relations Board applied the three-part Shoppe-McDonnell analysis. Id. 
at *8-9. 
- 45 -
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
credible than the employee’s testimony. Id. at *9. The ICA 
determined that “based on the testimony that the HLRB found 
credible, [the employer] had legitimate reasons for firing [the employee].” Id. 
The reasons given by the employer in Si-Nor — 
the ability of the employee to work without insubordination and disruptive altercations — were related to the employee’s ability to perform the work in question and were therefore legitimate. 
In contrast, this court evaluated the reason 
articulated by the employer in Sam Teague, Ltd. v. Hawai ʻi Civil 
Rights Commission, 89 Hawai ʻi 269, 971 P.2d 1104 (1999), and 
determined that the articulated reason was not legitimate.22 Id. 
at 277-79, 971 P.2d at 1112-14. In Sam Teague, a female employee was terminated after taking a leave of absence for pregnancy, in violation of the employer’s policy of not allowing leave in the first year of employment. Id. at 272-74, 971 P.2d 
at 1107-09. This court held that the employer’s “no leave” 
policy violated Hawai ʻi law and administrative rules that 
required employers to provide a leave of absence for a 
“reasonable period of time” for “pregnancy, childbirth, or 
22 In Sam Teague,  the employer appealed the decision and award in
favor of the employee by the Hawai #i Civil Rights Commission. The court 
analyzed the claims under the Shoppe-McDonnell rubric and the definitions and
requirements of HRS §§ 378-1, -2, and -3. Sam Teague, 89 Hawai ʻi 269, 278-81,
971 P.2d 1104, 1113-16. 
- 46 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
related medical conditions.” Id. at 277-79, 971 P.2d at 1112-
14. 
In addition to specifically holding that the policy 
was invalid, the court also evaluated the legitimacy of the 
employer’s articulated reason for the termination: that the 
employee was terminated because she intentionally failed to disclose her pregnancy before accepting a job where leave was not permitted in the first year. 
Id. at 278-79, 971 P.2d at 
1113-14. The court in Sam Teague found that the “no leave” policy had not been communicated to the employee, nor was she informed that the employer’s requested “one-year commitment” meant “working twelve consecutive months with no extended 
leave.” 
Id.
 at 273, 278-79, 971 P.2d at 1108, 1113-14. The 
court found that the employee “could have reasonably believed 
that a one-year commitment simply meant that she would remain employed with the business for at least a term of one year” and that the employee intended to return to work after the birth of her child. Id. at 279, 971 P.2d at 1114. 
Based on those findings, the court concluded that the 
employer “failed to establish a legitimate nondiscriminatory 
explanation of the adverse employment action.” Id. This 
conclusion is consistent with the principle that the reason 
articulated by an employer is not legitimate when it is not related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in 
- 47 -
 
 
    
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
question. That is, because the employee in Sam Teague was able 
to perform the job in conformance with the criteria as conveyed 
by the employer, the reason given by the employer – that the employee could not work 12 months consecutively – was unrelated 
to the ability of the employee to meet the requirements of the 
position as conveyed to the employee. 
Thus, the review of the cases of our courts addressing 
the second step of the Shoppe-McDonnell framework reflect that 
that the nondiscriminatory reason articulated by the employer for the adverse employment action must be related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question. 
2. Reasons provided by CDM were not legitimate 
Paragraph (5)(a) of the Declaration states it was 
Willis’ belief that Adams was not qualified for the job because 
“[Adams] had no sales experience in the prior five years.”
23 
Under the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis, we are required to 
determine whether the fact that “[Adams] had no sales experience 
in the prior five years” was a legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reason for CDM not to have hired Adams. 
Specifically, the 
analysis must consider whether sales experience in the prior 
23 Willis stated his “belief” that Adams had no sales experience in
the prior five years. Adams’ lack of sales experience in the past five years
was established by Adams’ declaration attached to Adams’ Memorandum inOpposition to [CDM’s] Motion for Summary Judgment Filed February 21, 2012 andher resume, which was attached as exhibit 10. 
- 48 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
five years was related to Adams’ ability to perform as a 
telephone sales person at CDM. 
a. CDM disavowed consideration of “sales experience” 
In determining whether “sales experience in the prior 
five years” was related to the ability to perform the duties of the position, we note that the ultimate decision-maker in this case, Willis, specifically stated in his Declaration that he “
did not consider any criteria stated in any advertising  or 
posting in making [his] decision not to hire [Adams].” 
(Emphasis added). However, “sales experience preferred” was one 
of the listed “requirements” in the online employment solicitation published by CDM. Since “sales experience” was a “criteria stated in [] advertising,” which Willis expressly 
disavowed
 as a consideration in his decision not to hire Adams, 
Willis’ proffered reason not to hire Adams because she had no sales experience in the prior five years is plainly contradicted by his own statement that he did not consider sales experience. 
As “sales experience in the past five years” was 
refuted as a consideration in the hiring decision by CDM’s own admission, the criterion was not related to the job in question and thus was not a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action. Therefore, the Declaration’s articulated criterion of “sales experience in the prior five years” did not satisfy CDM’s 
- 49 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
burden to produce a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its 
hiring decision in this case. 
b. “Sales experience” was not shown to be related to the
ability to perform the job in question 
Second, even assuming the proffered justification that 
“sales experience in the prior five years” had not been disavowed by CDM, this justification was not related to an individual’s ability to perform as a telephone sales person because it is controverted by the advertised qualifications for the job. 
CDM’s posted solicitation for the position stated 
“Sales experience preferred,” but the solicitation did not indicate that sales experience in the last five years was 
required in order to be qualified for the position. 
The justification in the Declaration is also 
contradicted by the employee-training program highlighted in CDM’s posted solicitation. 
CDM’s solicitation stated, “We offer 
recognized training to build upon your formal education/experience and teach you the business of advertising and summit sales . . . .” “Here are a few key benefits of working at CDM Media: . . . First-class Sales Training Program from the best in the industry.” Similarly, a newspaper article 
regarding CDM’s employment solicitation stated “[a]ll sales 
hires will go through an eight-week comprehensive training course.” 
- 50 -
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
“Sales experience in the prior five years” was not 
shown to be related to Adams’ ability to perform the duties of a 
telephone sales person because CDM’s hiring advertisements indicated that sales experience was
 not required to be qualified 
for the position and also promised to provide extensive sales training. Thus, the criterion of “sales experience in the prior five years” was not a required qualification for the position, not a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action, and not related to Adams’ ability to perform the job in question. Therefore, CDM failed to meet its burden of production in the second step of the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis. 
c. “Legitimate” is integral to the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis 
The employer’s burden to articulate a legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory reason is not a burden to prove the truth of the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. 
That is, the 
requirement in the second step is that the “explanation” 
articulated be legitimate, Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at 
1059, not that the employer prove that the reason was true or 
correct. 
Further, the evaluation of the legitimacy of the 
articulated reason is distinct from an evaluation of the credibility of a defendant. 
The evaluation of the legitimacy of 
a nondiscriminatory reason for an adverse employment action in the context of the
 Shoppe-McDonnell 
test is only whether the 
- 51 -
 
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
reason is related to the ability of the individual to perform 
the work in question; in contrast, an evaluation of credibility looks to whether the reason was believed or is worthy of credence. Thus, the evaluation of legitimacy does not transform 
the burden to produce a legitimate reason into a burden to prove 
that reason.24 
However, the minority would go further, essentially 
reading “legitimate” out of the Shoppe-McDonnell  test. See 
minority at 16-18. 
The minority would hold that “an employer’s 
proffered reason must be taken as true .” Id. at 18, 19 
(emphasis added); see also id. at 31 (“[W]e must assume that the 
proffered evidence is true.”). Under the minority’s analysis, 
no analysis of the legitimacy of the reason is permissible; a 
court is required to accept any nondiscriminatory reason and one completely unrelated to the qualifications of the individual to perform the job. Respectfully, the authority cited for this proposition, Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993), 
and Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, does not mandate unexamined 
acceptance of any nondiscriminatory reason. 
Hicks states that in the second step of the McDonnell 
Douglas analysis, the employer must “introduce evidence which, 
24 Thus, the contention of the minority that under this decision the
“burden shifts to the employer-defendant to prove that the reasons for its
decision,” minority at 33, is incorrect. 
- 52 -
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
taken as true, would permit the conclusion that there was a 
nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action.” Hicks
, 509 
U.S. at 509 (emphasis in original). Some examination by the 
court is implied by the directive that the evidence presented 
must be sufficient to “permit the conclusion.” See also Texas 
Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 255 (1981) 
(holding that the “explanation provided must be legally sufficient to justify a judgment for the defendant” and noting that the “sufficiency of the defendant’s evidence should be evaluated” (emphasis added)).
25 Similarly, Shoppe states, “The 
25 The remaining cases cited by the minority do not reduce the
requirement that the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason “must be legally
sufficient to justify a judgment for the defendant.” Burdine, 450 U.S. at
255 (emphasis added); see Woodson v. Scott Paper Co., 109 F.3d 913, 920 n.2(3d Cir. 1997) (The second step “is satisfied if the defendant articulates
any legitimate reason for the discharge”); Krenik v. Cnty. of Le Sueur, 47
F.3d 953, 958 (8th Cir. 1995) (“In the second part . . . the burden shifts tothe defendant who must . . . produc[e] evidence, ‘that the plaintiff wasrejected . . . for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.’”). Trans World 
Airlines, Inc. v. Thurston, 469 U.S. 111 (1985), minority at 28, did not
substantively discuss legitimacy because it did not apply McDonnell Douglas.
The “test is inapplicable where the plaintiff presents direct evidence ofdiscrimination. . . . In this case, there is direct evidence.” Id. at 121;
see also Wright v. Southland Corp., 187 F.3d 1287, 1305 (11th Cir. 1999)
(same) (cited by minority at 30). 
A review of the cases cited by the minority in support of its
argument that an employer’s action may be based on an objectively false buthonestly held belief do not refute the conclusion that the reason articulatedstill must be legitimate because legitimacy was not at issue in those cases.
Minority at 35-37; see Sybrandt v. Home Depot, U.S.A., Inc., 560 F.3d 553,
558 (6th Cir. 2009) (plaintiff stipulated that the employer “articulated a
facially legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating heremployment”); 
Flores v. Preferred Technical Grp., 182 F.3d 512, 515 (7th Cir.
1999) (articulated reason was insubordination and “[i]nsubordination is a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for firing an employee”). In other 
cases cited by the minority, the second prong of the McDonnell Douglas testwas not substantively examined but the articulated reasons were manifestlylegitimate. See Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1062-63
(9th Cir. 2002) (articulated reason was that employee violated company
procedures and was dishonest during the ensuing investigation); Tesh v. U.S.
(continued. . .) 
- 53 -
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
employer’s explanation must be in the form of admissible 
evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would 
support a finding  that unlawful 
discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment 
action.” Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059 (emphasis 
added). Thus, Shoppe, too, indicates that the nondiscriminatory 
reason must be evaluated for legitimacy. 
The Shoppe decision undertook just such an analysis: 
Under these circumstances, there does not appear to be a
genuine issue of fact regarding Plaintiff’s failure to
perform the duties of store manager satisfactorily.Therefore, Defendants have articulated legitimate,nondiscriminatory reasons for the adverse employment actionagainst Plaintiff. 
Shoppe, 94 Hawai ʻi at 381, 14 P.3d at 1062 (emphasis added); see 
also Sam Teague, 89 Hawai ʻi at 279, 971 P.2d at 1114 (“Therefore, 
[employer] has failed to establish a legitimate 
nondiscriminatory explanation of the adverse employment action.”). 
Thus, our examination of legitimacy is consistent 
with this court’s prior holdings. 
The minority’s analysis is inconsistent with these 
prior decisions. Our case law has not provided any decision in 
which a reason unrelated to the ability of the person to perform 
(. . .continued)
Postal Serv., 349 F.3d 1270, 1272 (10th Cir. 2003) (articulated reason for
termination was that “an investigation revealed that [employee] was dishonest
in pursuing [a] workers’ compensation claim”); Majewski v. Automatic Data
Processing, Inc.,
 274 F.3d 1106, 1116 (6th Cir. 2001) (articulated reason was
the employee’s “increasingly poor job performance”). 
- 54 -
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
the job has been accepted as satisfying the second step of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell  analysis. The minority’s reasoning would 
impose new constraints on our law by unreasonably restricting 
the power of a court to evaluate the legitimacy of a defendant’s 
articulated reason. Thus, the analysis of the minority is 
contrary to Hawai ʻi law that the hiring or discharge decision of 
an individual protected under HRS § 378-2 shall be related to 
the ability of the person to perform the work in question. 
The minority maintains that the McDonnell Douglas  test 
represents a “universally accepted framework.” Minority at 31. 
However, McDonnell Douglas has been the subject of significant academic 
criticism.26 It has been objected to by prominent state 
jurists for its lack of clarity and effect of undermining its own purpose and provoked a line of criticism over its use in the summary judgment context. In 
Trott v. H.D. Goodall Hosp. , 66 
A.3d 7 (Me. 2013), Justice Silver wrote separately to reaffirm his position that the Maine Supreme Court “should not apply the three-step, burden-shifting [McDonnell Douglas] analysis . . . 
26 See, e.g. , Sandra F. Sperino, Beyond McDonnell Douglas, 34
Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L. 257 (2013); William R. Corbett, Fixing Employment
Discrimination Law, 62 SMU L. Rev. 81 (2009); Martin J. Katz, UnifyingDisparate Treatment (Really), 59 Hastings L.J. 643 (2008); Jamie DarinPrenkert, The Role of Second-Order Uniformity in Disparate Treatment Law:McDonnell Douglas’s Longevity and the Mixed-Motives Mess, 45 Am. Bus. L.J.
511, 512-15 (2008); Michael J. Zimmer, The New Discrimination Law: Price
Waterhouse Is Dead, Whither McDonnell Douglas?, 53 Emory L.J. 1887, 1930(2004); Michael Evan Gold, Towards a Unified Theory of the Law of Employment
Discrimination
, 22 Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L. 175 (2001). 
- 55 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
to discrimination claims at the summary judgment stage” because 
“it unnecessarily complicates the courts’ already difficult task.” 
Id. at 16 (Silver, J., concurring). “This rigid and 
artificial . . . analysis confuses rather than clarifies the 
ultimate issue in employment discrimination cases: whether there 
is evidence of discrimination.” Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted); see Curlee v. Kootenai Cnty. Fire & Rescue, 224 P.3d 458, 463 (Idaho 2008) (concluding that while the burden-shifting analysis is applicable at trial, it should not be applied at summary judgment); Heng v. Rotech Med. Corp., 688 N.W.2d 389, 401 (N.D. 2004) (stating that McDonnell Douglas has “little or no application at the summary judgment stage”). 
Federal jurists, too, have raised similar concerns. 
Judge Magnuson of the Eighth Circuit expressed in 
Griffith v. 
City of Des Moines, 387 F.3d 733 (8th Cir. 2004), that “[a]bsent from [McDonnell Douglas] was any justification or authority for this scheme” and observed that McDonnell Douglas has “confused courts across the nation.” Id. at 740 (Magnuson, J., concurring 
specially). “[C]ourts have failed to thoroughly examine the language of the statute and congressional intent, and instead 
have fought to keep an arbitrary paradigm alive.” 
Id.
 at 747 
(emphasis added). Judge Wood of the Seventh Circuit Court of 
Appeals called “attention to the snarls and knots” of the McDonnell Douglas test, referring to it as an “allemande worthy 
- 56 -
 
  
                                                 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
of the 16th century.”27 Coleman v. Donahoe, 667 F.3d 835, 863 
(7th Cir. 2012) (Wood, J., concurring). “The original McDonnell 
Douglas decision was designed to clarify and to simplify the plaintiff’s task . . . unfortunately, both of those goals have 
gone by the wayside.” Id. Judge Hartz of the Tenth Circuit 
Court of Appeals stated, “The use of the McDonnell Douglas 
framework [] readily lends itself to consideration of formalities instead of the essence of the issue at hand.” Wells 
v. Colo. Dep’t of Transp., 325 F.3d 1205, 1225 (10th Cir. 2003) (Hartz, J., concurring). Judge Tymkovich, also of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, stated adoption of the McDonnell Douglas framework “has left the entire area of law confused” and 
that the McDonnell Douglas “inquiry distracts the court from 
what it should be focusing its attention on: determining whether the plaintiff produced sufficient evidence of discrimination.”
 28 
27 An “allemande” is a dance form associated with Baroque music
originating in Europe in the sixteenth century, often involving lines of
couples dancing with interlocked arms. Allemande, Wikipedia (Feb. 15, 2015,
2:28 PM), http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allemande. 
28 The Supreme Court has moved away from a burden-shifting framework
in certain types of discrimination cases. In Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins,
490 U.S. 228 (1989), the Court stated that Burdine is inapplicable to prove
sex discrimination when the employer’s motive was a mixture of legitimate and
illegitimate reasons. Id. at 246-47 (plurality opinion); see also Desert
Palace, Inc. v. Costa, 539 U.S. 90, 99 (2003) (holding that a plaintiff in a
mixed motive case is required to prove his or her case by a preponderance ofthe evidence, using direct or circumstantial evidence). Similarly, in Gross
v. FBL Financial Services, Inc.,  557 U.S. 167 (2009), when the Court declined
to apply McDonnell Douglas in a mixed-motive, age discrimination complaint
brought under federal law, instead holding that a “plaintiff must prove by apreponderance of the evidence . . . that age was the ‘but-for’ cause of thechallenged employer decision.” 
Id. 
at 177-78. 
- 57 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
The Honorable Timothy M. Tymkovich, The Problem with Pretext, 85 
Denv. U. L. Rev. 503, 505, 522 (2008). 
The McDonnell Douglas framework, (or, in Hawai ʻi, the 
Shoppe-McDonnell
 test), is an analysis adopted by courts to 
apply an anti-discrimination law. The Shoppe-McDonnell test does not establish or modify HRS § 378-2, but instead it is a court-designed tool to effectuate the statute. Thus, what 
constitutes as a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason under HRS 
§ 378-2 ultimately must be discerned by an examination of the statute, its legislative history, and other principles of statutory construction.  See Griffith, 387 F.3d at 747 
(Magnuson, J., concurring specially). The relevance of the 
manner in which other courts may have interpreted the McDonnell Douglas framework is limited to the extent that the analyses of these courts were not designed to give effect to HRS § 378-2 and 
did not take into account the purpose and protections afforded 
by the Hawai ʻi legislature, which has specifically informed our 
analysis. 
The minority’s effective elimination of “legitimate” 
from the Shoppe-McDonnell  analysis would place Hawai ʻi employees 
eligible for protection because of race, sex, sexual 
orientation, age, religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital 
status, or status as a victim of domestic or sexual violence at a significant disadvantage. Under the minority’s analysis, the 
- 58 -

 
 
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
employer could posit any nondiscriminatory reason in order to 
rebut the plaintiff’s prima facie case, contrary to Hawai ʻi law, 
the intent of the legislature, and the prior holdings of this 
court, all in defense of a test that, as one jurist phrased it, “readily lends itself to consideration of formalities instead of the essence of the issue at hand.”
29 
d. Hypotheticals posed by the minority are insubstantial 
The minority posits a series of strained hypotheticals 
that it argues would result from a court’s examination of “legitimate;” however, each lacks substance and is readily answerable. 
The minority first suggests that “whenever the number 
of equally qualified applicants exceeds the number of positions, those qualified applicants not hired could have a cause of action” because “the only legitimate hiring consideration is whether the person is qualified.” Minority at 37. However, it is clear that the purpose of HRS Chapter 378 is not to prohibit 
29 The requirement that the job selection criteria be related to the
job in question already operates in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1965
prohibiting discrimination in hiring practices based on race, color,religion, sex, and national origin. That law “proscribes not only overtdiscrimination but also practices that are fair in form, but discriminatory
in operation.” Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431 (1971). “The 
touchstone is business necessity.” Id. (emphasis added). Thus, “[i]f an
employment practice which operates to exclude [a racial category] cannot be
shown to be related to job performance, the practice is prohibited.” Id. 
(emphasis added). 
There is no indication that Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1965 has resulted in a flood of spurious claims against employersbased upon the hypothetical scenarios envisioned by the minority, and thus weare assured that the application of the law enacted by our legislature willnot create such consequences. 
- 59 -
 
                                                 
  
Personality,***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
selection among applicants; it is to set forth the acceptable 
criteria for selection upon qualifications related to the position offered. HRS § 378-3(3) (“Nothing in this part shall be deemed to . . . [p]rohibit or prevent an employer from 
refusing to hire . . . any individual for reasons relating to 
the ability of the individual to perform the work in question . . . .”). Thus, an employer may select an employee from a pool of applicants to fill a limited number of positions by comparing and contrasting job-related qualifications without creating a cause of action. 
The minority also suggests that under our definition 
of legitimate, the employer could not take an applicant’s 
“personality” into consideration in its decisions. Minority at 
38. To the contrary, an individual’s personality may be a legitimate reason for an adverse employment decision when the personality trait is related to the ability to perform the work in question. On the other hand, an employee’s burden to show discrimination would be insurmountable if an employer could make adverse hiring decisions based on personality traits that were unrelated to the ability to perform the job.
30   
30 A discriminatory basis for an adverse hiring decision could be
readily justified by characterizing the reason as based on “personality.”
Personality embraces a person’s moods, attitudes, opinions, motivations, and
style of thinking, perceiving, speaking, and acting .”  Merriam-
Webster, 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/personality (last visited
December 29, 2014). Thus, if personality was a legitimate reason for an
(continued. . .) 
- 60 -
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Similarly, the minority suggests that an employer 
could face liability for incorrectly assigning a high score on 
an employment exam to the wrong person. Minority at 38-39. However, it would seem probable that such an exam would test 
qualities related to the ability to perform the work in 
question; thus the exam results would be related to the job, even if mistakenly applied to the wrong individual.
31 
3. Undisclosed criteria may weigh against finding of
legitimate 
Although not necessary to its primary holding based on 
illegal pregnancy discrimination, this court’s decision in Sam 
Teague focused in part on the employer’s failure to inform the employee of the “no leave” policy or the meaning of the one-year 
commitment. 89 Hawai ʻi at 273, 279, 971 P.2d at 1108, 1114. The 
ruling in Sam Teague that failing to communicate the existence 
of a job criterion is a factor that weighs against an employer’s 
use of that criterion as a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason 
for an adverse employment action is consistent with HRS Chapter 
(. . .continued)
adverse action even when unrelated to the position, an employer could decline
to hire a person on the grounds of mannerisms or style that may be culturally
based. 
31 The minority appears to also assert that test results are hearsay
and are thus precluded from providing a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.
Minority at 35. To clarify, an in-court statement based on personal
knowledge of test results is not hearsay. In contrast, if a statement in a
declaration relies upon information provided by another person, as in thiscase, it is not based on personal knowledge and is inadmissible as hearsay,barring an exception to the hearsay rule. See infra, section III.C.5. 
- 61 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
378’s purpose of ensuring that employment decisions are made 
based on “factors [that] are applied equally to all applicants.” 1963 Senate Journal at 866. 
If an employer discloses the criteria that the 
employer actually uses to evaluate candidates, it is more likely that the employer is applying these criteria to all applicants. Conversely, “informal, secretive and subjective hiring or promotion decision processes tend to facilitate the consideration of impermissible criteria.” Roberts v. Gadsden 
Mem’l Hosp.
, 835 F.2d 793, 798 (11th Cir. 1988). 
Unpublicized or undisclosed criteria are not likely to 
be established occupational qualifications, nor can it be 
assumed that they are applied equally to all persons. See Rowe 
v. Gen. Motors Corp., 457 F.2d 348, 359 (5th Cir. 1972) 
(recognizing mechanisms for employment discrimination that involved promotion/transfer criteria “which can be covertly concealed”); Porter v. Milliken & Michaels, Inc., No. CIV. A. 99-0199, 2001 WL 1315435 (E.D. La. June 28, 2001) (noting that “[c]ourts have found that informal, secretive and subjective hiring or promotion decision processes tend to facilitate the 
consideration of impermissible criteria”). Therefore, 
undisclosed criteria measuring a person’s ability to perform the work in question are less likely to form the basis of legitimate and nondiscriminatory reasons for adverse employment actions. 
- 62 -

 
                                                 
  
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Here, “sales experience in the prior five years” was 
not publicized or disclosed as a hiring criterion in any 
materials in the record other than in Willis’ Declaration. CDM presented no evidence that the requirement of “sales experience 
in the prior five years” was applied or disclosed to any other 
applicant.
32 Thus, the criterion of “sales experience in the 
prior five years” may have been an informal and undisclosed hiring criterion applied only to Adams.
33 Second, Willis’ 
Declaration expressly states that he did not use “any criteria stated in any advertising or posting in making my decision not to hire [Adams].” However, the Declaration does not indicate whether this was also true for other applicants. Therefore, it 
is not clear if the hiring criteria used to evaluate applicants 
were publicized or disclosed to any person applying for the position. CDM’s rejection of its own publicized hiring criteria may also indicate that an informal, undisclosed, and individualized hiring criterion was applied to Adams. Consequently, the undisclosed hiring criterion relied upon by CDM to conclude that Adams was unqualified for the position, 
32 CDM also did not present evidence that sales experience in the
past five years was a usual or customary hiring requirement for the
particular position at issue, for any other position at CDM, or for theindustry in general. 
33 CDM’s disqualifying criteria - lack of sales experience in the
past five years - correlates exactly with Adams’ actual recent lack of salesexperience and may also indicate that an individualized criterion was appliedto Adams. 
- 63 -
 
 
 
 
 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
which may or may not have been applied to any other applicant, 
also weighs against a finding that the proffered reason was a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action against Adams. 
4. Additional reasons provided by CDM are inadmissible hearsay 
Willis also set forth three additional reasons for not 
hiring Adams, which can be considered collectively. The Willis Declaration states: 
5.	 It was my belief that the Plaintiff was not qualified
for the job because: 
. . . 
b. As far as I understood , most of her recent
(previous 10-15 years) sales experience was in
publishing and/or selling phone book
advertising which incorporated outside salesand face to face communication; 
c. As far as I understood , she had little or no
sales experience that involved selling to C-
Level corporate executives of Fortune 1,000
companies; and 
d. I was advised that she had said that she 
disliked tedious work. 
(Emphases added). 
Affidavits submitted by parties in support of a motion 
for summary judgment “shall be made on personal knowledge, shall 
set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein.” HRCP Rule 56(e) (2000) (emphasis added). “It is axiomatic that a motion for summary 
judgment should be decided on the basis of admissible evidence.” 
- 64 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Munoz v. Yuen, 66 Haw. 603, 605, 670 P.2d 825, 826 (1983) (per 
curium). 
Thus, “[t]he rule in Hawai ʻi is that an affidavit 
consisting of inadmissible hearsay cannot serve as a basis for 
awarding or denying summary judgment.” Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit 
Union v. Keka , 94 Hawai ʻi 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000) 
(alterations omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting GE Capital Hawaii, Inc. v. Miguel, 92 Hawai ʻi 236, 242, 
990 P.2d 134, 140 (App. 1999)); see also HRE Rule 801 (2002); 
HRE Rule 802 (1980); Fuller v. Pac. Med. Collections, Inc., 78 
Hawaiʻi 213, 224, 891 P.2d 300, 311 (App. 1995) (“[HRCP Rule 
56(e)] requires that facts set forth in the affidavits be 
admissible in evidence. . . . These requirements are mandatory.”). “A witness may not testify to a matter unless evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter.” HRE Rule 602 
(1992); see also Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 66, 828 P.2d 
286, 292 (1991) (“Affidavits in support of a summary judgment motion are scrutinized to determine whether the facts they aver are admissible at trial and are made on the personal knowledge of the affiant.”). Personal knowledge means “the witness perceived the event about which [the witness] testifies and [] has a present recollection of that perception.” HRE Rule 602 Commentary. 
- 65 -
 
                                                 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Therefore, an affidavit from an employer supporting a 
motion for summary judgment must be based on personal knowledge 
of the matter, i.e., admissible evidence. “The employer’s explanation must be in the form of admissible evidence and must 
clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of 
fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment action.” Shoppe, 94 
Hawai
ʻi at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059 (emphasis added). 
Correlatively, inadmissible evidence or hearsay cannot 
support an affidavit in a motion for summary judgment that purports to show a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for an adverse employment action in a discrimination-based claim applying the three-part Shoppe-McDonnell  analysis.
34 Takaki v. 
Allied Mach. Corp., 87 Hawai ʻi 57, 69, 951 P.2d 507, 519 (App. 
1998) (stating, in the context of discrimination claims based on race and work injury, “a motion for summary judgment may be decided only on the basis of admissible evidence”);
 see also 
Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co.
, 133 Hawai ʻi 332, 361-62, 328 P.3d 
34 Allowing the decision-maker to rely on asserted third-party
knowledge would shield the employer from discriminatory acts of anyone
surrounding the ultimate decision-maker, even if those actions were designed
and intended to result in an adverse employment action. See Staub v. Proctor 
Hosp., 131 S. Ct. 1186, 1189, 1193 (2011) (finding that, under a “cat’s paw”
theory, an employer was not shielded from the discriminatory actions of anemployee’s supervisors — even if they were not the ultimate personnel
decision-makers — if the ultimate decision-maker made a decision based on 
negative reports by the discriminatory supervisors that were put in theemployee’s personnel file specifically with the intent of getting theemployee fired). 
- 66 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
341, 370-71 (2014) (discussing how, in the context of the third 
step of the Shoppe-McDonnell  analysis of discrimination claims 
based on retaliatory discharge under HRS § 378-2(2), evidence must be admissible in order to be relied upon in a HRCP Rule 
56(e) motion for summary judgment). 
If a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason could be 
shown by evidence not based on personal knowledge and the 
plaintiff was unable to demonstrate pretext in the third step of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell  test, the consequence would be that a 
motion for summary judgment would be granted based on inadmissible evidence, contrary to the fundamental law of this jurisdiction. See HRCP Rule 56(e) (“Supporting and opposing 
affidavits [in a motion for summary judgment] . . . shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence . . . .”); 
Fuller, 78 Hawai ʻi at 224, 891 P.2d at 311 (“[T]he circuit courts 
should ascertain whether a foundation has been established for 
the admissibility of evidence offered in support of the motion before an order granting summary judgment is filed.”); Munoz, 66 
Haw. at 605, 670 P.2d at 826; 
Keka
, 94 Hawai ʻi at 221, 11 P.3d at 
9; Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 66, 828 P.2d at 292. Thus, the 
principle that evidence supporting a motion for summary judgment 
must be admissible applies in a motion for summary judgment upon a discrimination-based claim as it does in any other motion for summary judgment. 
- 67 -

 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
In the Willis declaration, subparagraphs (b) and (c) 
begin with the following: “[a]s far as I understood,” which 
indicates that the basis for the information is from an unidentified third person or external source. Likewise, 
subparagraph (d) states: “I was advised,” again indicating that 
the source of the information is an unidentified third party. The reasons stated in subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d) of Willis’ Declaration do not demonstrate that they are based on Willis’ personal knowledge because the bases for the information are unidentified third persons or external sources. Therefore, the proffered reasons in subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d) are not admissible statements and, accordingly, do not articulate 
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the adverse employment 
action against Adams. 
Further, the facts of the case belie that Willis’ 
statements were based on “personal knowledge,” as asserted by the minority. 
Minority at 34-35. A mere recitation that the 
witness “understood” or was “advised” of a fact is insufficient, in itself, to establish that the witness perceived the facts for which testimony is offered, i.e. that the testimony is based on 
personal knowledge. 
See Addison M. Bowman, Hawai ʻi Rules of 
Evidence Manual § 602-1[3] (2014-15 ed.) (finding testimony of a 
person on O ʻahu regarding weather on the Big Island is 
objectionable on lack of personal knowledge grounds); 
State v. 
- 68 -
 
                                                 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Apollonio , 130 Hawai ʻi 353, 362, 311 P.3d 676, 685 (2013) 
(striking testimony of a witness where nothing in evidence would 
support a finding that the witness had personal knowledge of the fact at issue). 
Here, it is uncontroverted that Willis never met 
Adams; Adams’ only interview was with Bera, CDM’s Human Resources 
Director.35 According to CDM’s established hiring 
procedure, Bera “host[ed] the first round of interviews and review[ed] all candidates that came in for [an] interview and narrow[ed] down the list of potential candidates to meet with [Willis].” (Emphasis added). Thus, based on established hiring procedures and the fact that Adams only met with Bera, Willis’ two statements indicating “as far as I understood” and the statement “I was advised” are clearly not based on Willis’ personal knowledge. Further, it would appear that Bera had 
significant input in the decision not to hire Adams, if he did 
not make the decision outright. 
Additionally, Willis’ Declaration states in paragraph 
six that CDM did not hire any younger applicants with equal or lower qualifications for the position. Although not specifically stated as a reason for Adams not being qualified for the position, paragraph six is entirely conclusory, and no 
35 The record does not contain a declaration from Bera. 
- 69 -
 
  
                                                 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
admissible evidence was adduced to establish this “fact.”36 
“Ultimate or conclusory facts or conclusions of law are not to 
be utilized in a summary judgment affidavit.” Miller, 9 Haw. 
App. at 66, 828 P.2d at 292. Accordingly, Willis’ statement 
that no younger, equally or less qualified applicants were hired 
cannot form the basis of a legitimate reason not to hire Adams. 
The minority acknowledges that “[a]n employer 
satisfies this second step through admissible evidence of the 
employer’s reason for its decision.” Minority at 18 (emphasis added). The minority does not assert that Willis had any interaction with Adams or contest that Willis must have obtained the information contained in subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d) of 
his Declaration from some other source. According to the 
minority, these subparagraphs “were offered for the limited non-hearsay purpose of articulating a reason why he made the decision not to hire Adams.” 
Id.
 at 34-35. Thus, as the 
minority contends that subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d) of the Willis Declaration are admissible non-hearsay, the minority is asserting that the statements in Willis’ Declaration were not offered for the truth of the reasons contained within those 
36 That is, there was no admissible evidence as to any actual sales
experience of the hired applicants, or whether any such experience occurred
within the past five years. 
- 70 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
statements but only to demonstrate that Willis had reasons for 
his decision. 
However, the minority also insists the reasons 
proffered by the employer “must be taken as true,” minority at 
18-19, without evaluation of the substance of those reasons. 
See, e.g. , id. at 32 (“[W]e must assume that the proffered 
evidence is true.”). If the reasons proffered by a defendant-
employer must be taken as true, then the argument of the minority that the employer’s reasons are not offered for their truth, is logically precluded. 
Additionally, if the proffered reasons are not offered 
for their truth and only offered to demonstrate that the 
employer had a legitimate reason, then a plaintiff could never 
prove pretext in the third step of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell  test. 
That is, if the proffered reason is not offered for its truth, then it could not be shown as a pretext for discrimination because it was not offered as a true reason for the defendant
-
employer’s action. 
It is manifest that the reasons of the employer are 
proffered for their truth, as it is unassailable that a court 
would not accept as a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason the 
bare statement by an employer that an individual was not hired because of an unspecified reason. Rather, an employer’s statement could only provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
- 71 -
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
reason to the court if the employer identifies and provides the 
basis for that reason. Here, the substantive reasons proffered were that Adams’ previous sales experience was in outside sales, Adams had little to no experience selling to C-level corporate 
executives, and Adams had said she disliked tedious work. These 
statements were offered upon a central disputed issue in the summary judgment proceeding for application in the second prong of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell  test and were intended by the employer 
to be duly considered by the trial court as CDM’s articulation of its legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for not hiring 
Adams.37 Consequently, in compliance with our law of summary 
judgment, Willis was required to have personal knowledge of the 
matters asserted in his statements in order to satisfy the 
burden of production imposed on CDM. 
The minority further indicates that Willis’ 
Declaration was admissible “even if the . . . reasoning is based on 
third-party information .” Id. at 35 (emphasis added). 
However, there is no alternate standard by which evidence is admitted under the Shoppe-McDonnell test. If the statement of a 
37 In applying the second step of the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis,
the trial court was not required to ascertain whether Adams’ previous sales
experience was actually in outside sales, whether Adams had little to noexperience selling to C-level corporate executives, or whether Adams had saidshe disliked tedious work; instead, assuming those reasons were provided in
admissible form, the trial court only needed to consider whether the
defendant-employer satisfied its burden of production to show that thereasons provided were both non-discriminatory and related to Adams’ abilityto perform the work in question. 
- 72 -
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
party is offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted, the 
report from a party not present in the court — i.e. “third-party information” — remains inadmissible. HRE Rules 801, 802. The undisputed facts are that Willis had no interaction with Adams. 
As Willis could only have gained the information in his 
declaration from Bera, his declaration is based on third-party information; it is thus hearsay and is inadmissible.
38 HRE Rule 
802. 
The minority does not contend that Willis’ statements 
would be admissible at trial. 
If Willis were to testify at a 
trial, he could only testify that he had acted based on 
38 The cases cited by the minority do not reduce the requirement
that the evidence submitted must be admissible. See minority at 35 (citing
Rivera v. City & Cnty. of Denver,
 365 F.3d 912 (10th Cir. 2004)); McDonald-
Cuba v. Santa Fe Protective Servs., Inc., 644 F.3d 1096 (10th Cir. 2011)).
In both cases, the second step of the McDonnell Douglas test was not indispute; thus in neither case did the court examine the admissibility of the
evidence supporting the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. Rivera, 365
F.3d at 920 (“[W]e address only the issue of pretext.”); McDonald-Cuba, 644
F.3d at 1102 (analyzing only the pretext issue). 
Furthermore, in neither case was the personal knowledge of the
defendant regarding the relevant information disputed. In Rivera, a city
worker was disciplined for falsifying a work report. 
The minority seizes on
the fact that the supervisor “was informed” of certain information; however,the information of which the supervisor “was informed” related to information
supporting the falsity of the report. Rivera, 365 F.3d at 918. The 
supervisor based his actual decision on “all of the information before him,”
consisting of six specific reasons, including the supervisor’s owncalculations. Id. at 919. 
Similarly, in McDonald-Cuba, the plaintiff-employee formed a
company that she registered on the Central Contracting Registry (CCR), adatabase for government contractors, where it was identified as performingsecurity guard services. McDonald-Cuba
, 644 F.3d at 1099. The employer
company president “discovered the CCR printout” and determined there was a
“huge conflict of interest” from plaintiff’s competing business and promptly
terminated the employee. McDonald-Cuba, 644 F.3d at 1099, 1103. Nothing in
McDonald-Cuba suggests the defendant lacked personal knowledge regarding theplaintiff’s competing business. 
- 73 -
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
information provided to him without describing the substance of 
that information. The information itself would be admissible only through another witness with personal knowledge. Thus, the contention of the minority that hearsay is admissible for the 
“limited non-hearsay purpose” of articulating a legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory reason for an adverse employment action is contrary to HRCP Rule 56(e), which governs summary judgment 
proceedings and unequivocally requires 
“facts as would be 
admissible in evidence.” 
HRCP Rule 56(e) (2000) (emphasis 
added). 
Affidavits or testimony pertaining to employment 
discrimination are not exceptions to the rule disallowing 
hearsay. HRE Rule 802. As stated, allowing summary judgment to 
be rendered on evidence that includes inadmissible hearsay is 
contrary to Hawai ʻi law. See Munoz, 66 Haw. at 605, 670 P.2d at 
826; Takaki, 87 Hawai ʻi at 69, 951 P.2d at 519; Lales
, 133 
Hawaiʻi at 361-62, 328 P.3d at 370-71. The minority’s analysis, 
therefore, would create an exception with regard to employment 
discrimination claims, allowing summary judgment to be based on an affidavit that was premised upon inadmissible hearsay statements. This would create a 
lower standard for evaluating 
employment discrimination claims, contrary to the purpose of the law to “protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all 
- 74 -

 
also 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
persons to seek . . . employment . . . without discrimination.” 
1963 Senate Journal at 866. 
Weakening the evidentiary standard in this context 
would create an additional layer of confusion to this already 
complicated test and weaken the ability of individuals to avail 
themselves of the protection of our laws; a danger that has been previously recognized. See H.D. Goodall Hosp., 66 A.3d at 16 
(Silver, J., concurring) (criticizing the use of the 
McDonnell 
Douglas test in summary judgment); City of Des Moines, 387 F.3d at 740 (Magnuson, J., concurring specially) (same); Coleman, 667 F.3d at 863 (Wood, J., concurring) (same); Colo. Dep’t of Transp., 325 F.3d at 1225 (Hartz, J., concurring) (same); see 
Tymkovich, The Problem with Pretext, 85 Denv. U. L. Rev. at 
505, 522 (2008). 
5. CDM did not articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason 
In summary, the justification of “no sales experience 
in the prior five years” was not related to Adams’ ability to perform as a telephone sales person at CDM because it was negated as a hiring criterion by Willis, and it was controverted as a required qualification for the position by statements in 
the solicitation. “Sales experience in the prior five years” 
also may have been an undisclosed hiring criterion that may have been applied only to Adams. 
The remaining reasons proffered by 
- 75 -
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***
 
Willis’ Declaration in subparagraphs (b), (c), and (d) were 
inadmissible statements that may not be considered by a court. Therefore, we conclude that CDM did not satisfy its burden to produce a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for declining to 
hire Adams as an International Media Sales Executive.
39 
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing reasons, the ICA erred in 
affirming the circuit court’s granting of summary judgment. The 
ICA’s November 21, 2013 Judgment on Appeal and the circuit 
court’s July 24, 2012 Final Judgment are vacated, and this case 
is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Charles H. Brower 
for petitioner 
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
/s/ Richard W. Pollack
Diane W. Wong
for respondent 
 /s/ Steven S. Alm 
39 Adams presented a prima facie case of age discrimination and CDM
failed to satisfy its burden to produce a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for not hiring Adams. As no legitimate reason was adduced, we neednot address pretext in the third step of the 
Shoppe-McDonnell 
analysis. 
- 76 -
