     ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-10-0000044 11-MAY-2012 
10:21 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
JULIANNE NGUYEN BERRY, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs.
 
WAYNE FOSTER BERRY, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-10-0000044
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
(ICA NO. CAAP-10-0000044; FC-D NO. 06-1-0211)
 
May 11, 2012
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA,
DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold that (1) the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(the court)  did not abuse its discretion in denying Petitioner’s
October 9, 2009 Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree (Motion to Set
 
Aside) seeking to set aside the November 21, 2008 Decree Granting
 Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody (Divorce Decree)
 because Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant Wayne Foster Berry
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
         
           
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(Petitioner) had notice that his failure to appear at a scheduled 
settlement conference would result in default, and the court acknowledged that Petitioner’s motion was for Hawai' i Family 
Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60(b) relief, although Petitioner had failed to cite HFCR Rule 60(b) in support of the motion; (2) whether the Divorce Decree exceeded the relief previously requested by Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee Julianne Nguyen Berry (Respondent) in her Complaint and Proposed Decree with respect to the award of copyrights held in Petitioner’s name (hereinafter, “the copyrights”) need not be decided; inasmuch as (3) the court abused its discretion in declining to set aside that part of the Divorce Decree that transferred Petitioner’s entire ownership interest in the copyrights to Respondent in violation of federal law. We thus vacate the August 17, 2011 judgment of the ICA filed pursuant to its July 28, 2011 Summary Disposition Order 
2
(SDO), affirming the September 22, 2010 Order Denying Motion to
Set Aside and the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law filed
 by the court, in part, insofar as it held the court properly
 awarded Respondent the copyrights. 
We vacate that portion of the
 
Divorce Decree that awarded Respondent all ownership interest in
 the copyrights, and remand to the court for a determination of
 the economic interest in the copyrights to which Respondent is
 entitled. We affirm the Divorce Decree in all other respects.
 
2
 The SDO was filed by Presiding Judge Daniel R. Foley and Associate
 
Judges Alexa D.M. Fujise and Lisa M. Ginoza.
 
2
         
       
          
           
        
            
         
         
           
          
         
   
 
       
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
I.
 
The following essential matters, some verbatim, are
 
from the record and the submissions of the parties. 
A.
 
Petitioner and Respondent were married on December 24,
 
1992. On January 20, 2006, Respondent filed a complaint for
 
divorce (Complaint). On September 25, 2006, the court filed an
 Order of Dismissal pursuant to HFCR Rule 41(e)(1) for want of
 service.
3
 
On October 5, 2006, Respondent filed an Ex Parte Motion
 
to Reinstate for Good Cause Complaint for Divorce and Summons
 Filed on 1/20/2006 and to Extend Time to Serve Complaint for
 Divorce and Summons Filed on 1/20/2006 (Motion to Reinstate
 Complaint and Extend Time to Serve). Attached was the affidavit
 
4
of Respondent’s counsel, Cheryl Brawley (Brawley),  in which she
declared (1) that the last known address of Petitioner was an address on Muolea Place in Honolulu, Hawai' i (Muolea address), 
3 HFCR Rule 41(e)(1) (2006) provides as follows:
 
A diligent effort to effect service shall be made in all
actions, and if no service be made within 6 months after an
action or post-decree motion has been filed then after
notice of not less than 10 days to the filing party at the
last known address, the same may be dismissed . Such a
dismissal may be set aside and the action reinstated by
order of court for good cause shown on motion duly filed in
said action within 30 days after mailing of the order of
dismissal and notice to the last known address of the
 parties or parties’ counsel.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
4
 Respondent’s appellate counsel, who also argued on Respondent’s
 
behalf at oral argument in this case, is Carl H. Osaki.
 
3
         
           
           
          
        
          
 
         
          
           
         
           
           
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2) a certified copy of the Complaint was sent to Process Service 
Exclusive, LLC (PSE) to be personally served on Petitioner at that address, (3) on April 7, 2006, PSE notified Brawley it had been unable to serve Petitioner, it made nine attempts to serve Petitioner at the Muolea address, Petitioner no longer lived at that address, and it attempted to serve Petitioner at the United States District Court, District of Hawai' i on May 5, 2006, but 
was unable to do so, and (4) although PSE was told that Petitioner no longer resided at the Muolea address, Respondent reasonably believed that Petitioner continued to reside there. Respondent sought reinstatement of her Complaint and additional time to serve Petitioner. The court granted Respondent’s motion in an order filed on October 5, 2006, which reinstated Respondent’s Complaint and provided Respondent until January 20, 
5
2007  to serve Petitioner with the Complaint. 
On March 6, 2007, Respondent filed a Motion for
 
Personal Service Without the State and Affidavit (Motion for
 Personal Service), seeking an order pursuant to HRS § 580-3(b)
6
 
5 The order actually read “January 20, 2006[.]” It is apparent that
 
the court meant January 20, 2007, and Petitioner conceded in his Non-Hearing
Motion to Dismiss Expired Complaint for Divorce (Motion to Dismiss) that
January 20, 2006 date was “obviously a typographical error[.]”
 
6
 HRS § 580-3(b) (2006 Repl.) provides with respect to service of
 
the complaint:
 
If service by an authorized process server is not feasible
or is inconvenient or if the defendant is without the State,
the court may authorize the service to be made by any other
responsible person, or the court may authorize notice of the
pendency of the action and of a time and place of hearing,
which shall be not less than twenty days after the giving of
personal notice, to be given to the defendant personally by
(continued...)
 
4
         
          
           
    
 
    
         
          
            
           
         
          
         
           
       
         
 
       
            
           
          
             
           
            
              
         
           
         
          
           
          
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7
and HFCR Rule 4(e)  authorizing personal service by an officer or
person authorized to effect service of legal process under the
 
laws of Petitioner’s state of residence, Florida. 
The motion was
 
granted on March 14, 2007.8 An Affidavit of Service was filed
 
with the court on August 31, 2007, indicating that Petitioner had
 been personally served with the complaint. 
B.
 
On September 12, 2007, Petitioner filed, pro se, a Non-
Hearing Motion to Dismiss Expired Complaint for Divorce (Motion
 
6(...continued)
s
uch person and in such manner as the court shall designate
and the case may be heard and determined at or after the
time specified in the notice.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7 HFCR Rule 4(e) 2007 provides:
 
(e) Summons: Other Service. Whenever a statute or an order
of court provides for service upon a party not an inhabitant
of or found within the State of a summons , or of a notice,
or of an order in lieu of summons, service shall be made
under the circumstances and in the manner prescribed by the
statute or order . Whenever a statute or an order of court
 
requires or permits service by publication of a summons, or
of a notice, or of an order in lieu of summons, any
publication pursuant thereto shall be made under the
circumstances and in the manner prescribed by the statute or
order.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
8 In his Application, Petitioner complains that Petitioner’s Motion 
for Personal Service was granted by the court nearly three months after thetime for service had expired under the order granting Respondent’s Motion toReinstate Complaint and Extend Time for Service without further extension bythe court. Petitioner did not expressly raise any challenge to this in hisMotion to Dismiss. Arguably, Petitioner waived any challenge to service of process. However, Petitioner did note that Respondent was granted an order toserve him out of the state after the extension of the time for service had lapsed. Consequently, the court implicitly rejected any argument challengingthe sufficiency of service by denying Petitioner’s Motion. Moreover, it doesnot appear that Petitioner’s due process rights were materially affectedinasmuch as Petitioner was not residing in Hawai 'i when Respondent was
attempting to serve him with the Complaint, there is evidence that Respondenthad been attempting to serve Petitioner for months, and Petitioner waseventually personally served with the Complaint. 
5
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to Dismiss). Petitioner argued (1) lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction, (2) lack of personal jurisdiction, (3) improper venue, (4) insufficiency of process, (5) insufficiency of service of process, (6) failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, and (7) failure to join a party under Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 19. 
C.
 
On February 4, 2008, Respondent filed with the court a
 
Motion to Set and Notice of Motion (Motion to Set), her Position
 Statement, by way of a proposed decree, (Proposed Decree), Income
 and Expense Statement, and Asset and Debt Statement. In the
 Proposed Decree, Petitioner indicated she was seeking, inter
 alia, sole legal and physical custody of the minor children of
 the parties, child support, expenses for tutoring for the
 children, medical and dental insurance coverage for the minor
 children, and alimony. With respect to the copyrights,
 Respondent indicated that “[Petitioner] shall be awarded his
 interest in any copyrights/patents obtained during the marriage
 and [Respondent] waives any interest therein, provided that
 within 15 days of the effective date of [the] Divorce Decree,
 [Petitioner] pays [Respondent] a sum representing her interest in
 [the] said property[.]”
 
The court set the matter for a hearing on March 27,
 
2008. On March 10, 2008, Petitioner filed, pro se, a Motion to
 Strike [Respondent’s] Motion to Set and Notice of Motion for a
 
6
         
 
          
          
         
            
            
             
           
            
           
            
          
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Dismissed and Expired Complaint for Divorce (Motion to Strike).9
 
In his Motion to Set, Petitioner listed 5500 Military Trail in
 
Jupiter, Florida (Military address) as his address. 
Petitioner did not appear at the March 27, 2008
 
hearing. The court minutes indicate that the court attempted to
 contact Petitioner by telephone, the bailiff left a message for
 Petitioner on his answering machine informing him that his case
 had been set for 9:00 a.m. that day, it was 10:15 a.m.,
 Petitioner’s case was being heard at the moment, and Respondent
 should call the court back at the given number. That same day,
 the court filed Pretrial Order No. 1 setting forth various
 deadlines and court dates for the case, including a settlement
 conference date of June 19, 2008 and trial date of July 7, 2008. 
The court also filed orders dismissing Petitioner’s Motion to
 Dismiss and Motion to Strike for “lack of prosecution.” On April
 1, 2008, copies of the foregoing orders were mailed to Petitioner
 at his last known address, the Military address.
 
Petitioner was not present at the June 19, 2008,
 
settlement conference. On June 23, 2008, the court filed
 
9 In his motion, Petitioner asserted that he filed a Motion to
 
Dismiss, neither the court nor Respondent responded to his motion, several
clerks of the court confirmed Respondent’s Complaint was dismissed, Petitioner
received a letter from the court indicating that “no further action will be
 taken,” in the case, he received Respondent’s Motion to Set and Notice of
Motion at his home in Florida by mail, several clerks of the court confirmed
again that the Complaint had expired and was still “dismissed,” the clerks
 cautioned him that they could not give legal advice but suggested he contact
Respondent’s attorney and ask her to withdraw the Motion to Set, Petitioner
did so by letter, and Respondent’s attorney did not respond. As discussed
 herein, the court properly dismissed Petitioner’s Motion to Dismiss for lack
of prosecution for Petitioner’s failure to attend the hearing on the motion.
 
7
         
 
            
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Pretrial Order No. 2, continuing trial to the week of October 27,
 
2008 and settlement conference to September 18, 2008. The order
 stated in part, “If [Petitioner] fails to appear at settlement
 conference, he shall be defaulted.” (Emphasis added.) A
 Statement of Mailing was filed by Brawley on June 25, 2008,
 indicating that a copy of Pretrial Order No. 2 was mailed to
 Petitioner’s Military address.
10
 
The court minutes indicate that Petitioner was “not
 
present” at the September 18, 2008 settlement conference. On
 November 21, 2008, the court filed the Divorce Decree. The
 Divorce Decree does not reflect that the court entered default
 against Petitioner. However, the September 18, 2008 court
 minutes noted that three calls were made for Petitioner “with no
 response[,]” the “court minutes reflect that at last hearing the
 court stated that if [Petitioner] fails to appear at the next
 court hearing court will enter default against him and the
 divorce will be granted[, the] court defaulted [Petitioner],” and
 the “divorce is granted[.]”
 
The Divorce Decree granted a divorce to Respondent and
 
Respondent was awarded, inter alia, sole custody of the parties’
 minor children, child support, alimony, and “any and all interest
 in all of [Petitioner’s] rights, title and interest to any 
copyrights, patents, or any other intellectual property that he
 
10
 HFCR Rule 5 provides that motions may be served “by mailing it to
 
the attorney or party at the attorney’s or party’s last known address[.]”
 
8
         
    
      
          
       
        
      
      
          
        
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
authored or acquired during the period of the parties’ marriage,
 
including but not limited to” the “copyrights covered by the 37
 copyright registrations filed in the United States Copyright
 Office” and “all rights, title, and interest of [Petitioner], in,
 to or related to any software covered by or related to the End
 User License Agreement.” (Emphases added.)
 
D.
 1.
 
On October 9, 2009, Petitioner filed, pro se, a Motion
 
to Set Aside. In his motion, he argued that the Divorce Decree
 should be set aside because (1) Brawley committed fraud on the
 court by “claim[ing] to have noticed [Petitioner] with her
 filings and communications” when “she has not[,]” (2) he was not
 served with a copy of the Divorce Decree, (3) the children for
 whom he owed child support were not his biological children nor
 did he adopt them, and (4) federal law, namely, 17 U.S.C. §
 
11
 201(e),  prohibits a state court from involuntarily transferring
his copyrights with the sole exception of transfers made pursuant 
11 17 U.S.C. § 201(e) provides:
 
(e) Involuntary Transfer.-- When an individual author's
 
ownership of a copyright, or of any of the exclusive rights
under a copyright, has not previously been transferred
voluntarily by that individual author, no action by any
governmental body or other official or organization
purporting to seize, expropriate, transfer, or exercise
rights of ownership with respect to the copyright, or any of
the exclusive rights under a copyright, shall be given
effect under this title, except as provided under title 11.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
9
         
         
           
           
 
        
            
           
             
              
            
            
            
              
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to Title 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. In addition,
 
he incorporated by reference his Motion to Dismiss, in which he
 re-alleged the defenses previously noted.
 
2.
 
A hearing on Petitioner’s Motion to Set Aside was
 
originally set for January 13, 2010.
12 An order was filed on
 
January 13, 2010, continuing the hearing to February 10, 2010. 
The order indicates that Timothy Hogan (Hogan) appeared at the
 hearing as counsel for Petitioner. This is the first time
 Petitioner appears to have been represented by counsel inasmuch
 as all prior filings, including his Motion to Set Aside, were
 filed pro se. The order further indicated that Petitioner would
 be permitted to appear by telephone and must make arrangements
 for such appearance.
 
On January 27, 2010, Respondent filed a Responsive
 
Memorandum in Opposition to Petitioner’s Motion to Set Aside,
 arguing (1) Brawley did attempt to serve Petitioner with
 
13
 pertinent documents;  (2) service was not defective because HRS
12 The court minutes indicate that counsel for both Respondent and
 
Petitioner were present at the hearing, the hearing was continued to February
10, 2010, and Petitioner was permitted to attend the February hearing by
telephone.
 
13
 As to Petitioner’s first argument, Respondent contended that (a)
 
several attempts were made to serve Petitioner to no avail, (b) Petitioner was
personally served with the Complaint on August 14, 2007, (c) in Petitioner’s
March 10, 2008 Motion to Strike, he provided the Military address and a copy
of Pretrial Order No. 1 was sent to that address, (d) on April 11, 2008,
Petitioner acknowledged by letter that he received copies of the Motion to Set
and the orders dismissing his Motion to Strike and Motion to Dismiss, (e)
Petitioner stated in that letter that he checks his mail daily, but “‘in
 addition to regular mail . . . please email anything you file[;]’” he did not
 mention his landlord facing foreclosure or his failure to receive mail at his
(continued...)
 
10
         
 
    
          
          
         
          
         
           
         
            
           
          
        
              
        
         
       
         
        
        
          
         
        
         
          
       
            
           
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
§ 580-3 allows for service of process outside Hawai' i; (3) the 
court had jurisdiction over the Complaint pursuant to HRS § 580­
3.514 since both parties were residents of Hawai' i at the time the 
15
 and (4) the court properly entered default
 Complaint was filed;  judgment against Petitioner and Petitioner’s attempts to contest
 the court’s judgment were “‘[t]oo little, too late.’” 
13(...continued)
home  address,  (f)  on  June  5,  2009,  Brawley  sent  a  copy  of  her  Settlement
Conference  Statement  to  the  facsimile  number  provided  by  Petitioner  and  the
transmission  sheet  shows  that  the  facsimile  was  in  fact  sent,  (g)  on  June  25,
2008,  a  copy  of  Pretrial  Order  No.  2  was  mailed  to  the  Military  address,  which
set  forth  new  dates  for  the  settlement  conference  and  trial,  and  further
indicated  that  default  judgment  would  be  entered  against  him  if  he  failed  to
appear  at  the  settlement  conference.
 
14 HRS § 580-3.5 (2006 Repl.) provides:
 
In any proceeding in the family court, the court shall have
the power to render a personal judgment against a party who
is outside of this State and over whom jurisdiction is
acquired by service of process in the manner set forth in
section 580-3(b) or (c), if the party was personally served
with a copy of the summons or order to show cause and
complaint or other pleading upon which the judgment is based
and if the party was a domiciliary of this State (1) at the
time that the cause of action which is the subject of the
proceeding arose, or (2) at the time of the commencement of
the proceeding, or (3) at the time of service.
 
(Emphases added.) See note 8, supra, for the text of HRS § 580-3(b). HRS §
580-3(c) provides with respect to service of the complaint:
 
If the defendant is without the circuit, the court may
authorize service by registered or certified mail, with
request for a return receipt and direction to deliver to
addressee only. The return receipt signed by the defendant
shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant accepted
delivery of the complaint and summons on the date set forth
on the receipt. Actual receipt by the defendant of the
complaint and summons sent by registered or certified mail
shall be equivalent to personal service on the defendant by
an authorized process server as of the date of the receipt.
 
15 Respondent noted that Petitioner “continued to profess his
 
residency status even until March 29, 2007, when he filed his Complaint and
Demand for Jury Trial in Honolulu District Court” in a non-family court-
related case.
 
11
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent failed to respond to Petitioner’s third
 
argument regarding not having been served with the Divorce Decree
 
or his fifth argument regarding not being the biological or
 adoptive father of the children for whom he owed child support
 under the Divorce Decree.
 
3.
 
The hearing on Petitioner’s Motion to Set Aside took
 
place as scheduled on February 10, 2010. Petitioner appeared at
 the hearing by telephone. Petitioner argued that the Divorce
 Decree should be set aside because Petitioner was never served
 with the Divorce Decree, there was “[n]o attempt at all at an
 equitable division,” Petitioner had meritorious defenses
 regarding child support and alimony, the Divorce Decree exceeded
 the relief sought in the Complaint and Proposed Decree, and the
 transfer of Petitioner’s copyrights to Respondent violated
 federal law.
 
The court told Petitioner, now represented by counsel,
 
that it did “not see any reference in [the] October 9, 2009
 [Motion to Set Aside] to any specific rule.” The court then
 stated that it found “good cause to deny the motion to set aside
 the decree[,]” stating, “On the face of the motion I do not
 believe [Petitioner] has cited sufficiently to any Family Court
 rule or statutory cite that would obligate this court to set
 aside the divorce decree.” After pointing out that Petitioner
 had failed to cite a court rule, the court noted, “substantively,
 
12
         
  
          
  
         
         
    
        
  
          
        
        
       
   
     
         
           
          
       
      
        
           
       
     
         
       
          
         
      
        
         
          
         
         
          
         
          
           
          
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[Petitioner,] you’re arguing for [HFCR Rule] 60B relief.” The
 
court then ruled, “The court nonetheless is denying the relief
 sought[.] . . .”
16
 
4.
 
The court filed the following Findings of Fact
 
(findings) and Conclusion of Law (conclusions) regarding
 Petitioner’s Motion to Set Aside on September 22, 2010.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. The parties were married on December 24, 1992, in
Las Vegas, Nevada.
2. [Respondent] became a resident of the State of 
Hawai'i in 1975, and [Petitioner] became a resident of the
State of Hawai 'i in 1989. 
3. On January 20, 2006, [Respondent] filed the
Complaint for Divorce.
4. Numerous attempts were made in an effort to serve
[Petitioner].
5. [Respondent] hired a process server to effectuate
service of process. Nine (9) attempts were made to
effectuate service of process on [Petitioner] at his
 
16 HFCR Rule 60(b) provides:
 
(b) Mistakes; Inadvertence; Excusable Neglect; Newly
Discovered Evidence; Fraud. On motion and upon such terms as
are just, the court may relieve a party or a party's legal
representative from any or all of the provisions of a final
judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could
not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial
 under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated
intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other
misconduct of an adverse party; (4) the judgment is void;
(5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer
equitable that the judgment should have prospective
application; or (6) any other reason justifying relief from
the operation of the judgment. The motion shall be made
within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3)
not more than one year after the judgment, order, or
proceedings was entered or taken. For reasons (1) and (3)
the averments in the motion shall be made in compliance with
Rule 9(b) of these rules. A motion under this subdivision
(b) does not affect the finality of a judgment or suspend
its operation. This rule does not limit the power of a court
to entertain an independent action to relieve a party from a
judgment, order, or proceeding, or to set aside a judgment
for fraud upon the court.
 
13
         
 
       
        
         
          
   
         
          
        
      
 
         
     
         
          
  
        
  
         
 
       
     
  
        
         
        
      
     
         
  
        
  
        
        
        
       
            
    
        
        
       
            
        
 
       
      
         
        
     
    
       
     
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
residence, located  at  [t he  Muolea  address].
6. Whe
n [Respondent] learned that [Petitioner] was
required to appear at Federal District Court in Honolulu,
she sent a process server to the federal district court.
7. The process server waited for three (3) hours. But
again his efforts failed.
8. On October 5, 2006, [Respondent] filed her first
request to reinstate the matter, and to extend time to serve
[the C]omplaint . . . and summons upon [Petitioner].
9. [Respondent] learned that [Petitioner] relocated
to Florida.
 
10. On March 14, 2007, [Respondent] filed her Motion
for Personal Service without the State.
 
11. On August 14, 2007, [Petitioner] was served in
 
Florida.
 
12. [Petitioner] filed his Motion to Dismiss . . .(No
hearing was held).
13. On February 6, 2008, [Respondent] filed her
Motion to Set.
 
14. On March 10, 2008, [Respondent] filed his Motion
to Strike[.]
15. [Petitioner] provided his contact information as:
[Military address], Telephone number [xx], facsimile
17
transmission number [xx ].
16. [Petitioner’s Motion to Strike] was set for
hearing on March 27, 2008 , before the Honorable R. Mark
Browning.
17. [Petitioner] failed to appear at the hearing,
however, Judge Browning attempted to telephone [Respondent]
at the telephone number he provided.
18. No one answered the telephone, and the court
terminated the call.
 
19. [Petitioner’s] motion was denied for failure to
prosecute the matter.
20. Pre-trial Order No.1 was issue [sic], which
established all deadlines and set this matter for trial.
 
21. On April 11, 2008, [Petitioner] communicated with
[Brawley], acknowledging that he received , via mail, copies
of a transmittal, “copy of an Order to Set, copy of an Order
denying [Petitioner]'s motion to dismiss.
22. On June 5, 2009, [Respondent] , through her
attorney, faxed an unfilled [sic] copy of her Settlement
Conference Statement to the telephone number provided by
[Petitioner].
23. On June 25, 2008, a copy of Pre-Trial Order No. 2
was mailed to [Petitioner] at his [Military] address he
previously provided.
24. On September 5, 2008, [Petitioner] communicated
with [Brawley], referring to his [Military] address.
25. The parties were divorced on November 21, 2008.
26. Copies of the [Divorce Decree] were mailed, via
certified mail, parcel number 7003050000029036, to
[Petitioner], at his [Military] address.
27. On December 1, 2008, parcel number
7003050000029036 was delivered to [Petitioner’ Military]
 address.
 
17
 Petitioner’s contact information is deleted for purposes of
 
privacy.
 
14
         
      
      
        
     
         
  
  
      
         
        
         
   
       
        
        
          
         
     
          
          
      
    
         
       
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28. [Petitioner] was served with [Respondent]’s
Motion and Affidavit for Post Decree Relief.
 
29. The hearing on Respondent’s Motion [to Enforce]
was scheduled for February 10, 2010.
30. [Petitioner] filed his Motion to Set Aside on
October 7, 2009.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
Based upon the foregoing [findings], the preponderance
of the evidence, notice of the records and files, and
arguments of counsel, the Court hereby enters the following
[conclusions]:
1. The Court had jurisdiction over the parties and
the subject matter herein.
2. The Court had personal jurisdiction over
[Petitioner] when the Complaint for Divorce was filed on
January 20, 2006, because [Petitioner] by his own admission,continued to reside in Hawai 'i until March 29, 2007, when he
filed his Complaint and Demand for Jury Trial in HonoluluFederal Court [in an unrelated matter].
3. [Petitioner]'s Motion to Set Aside . . . was
denied on March 27, 2008, and [Petitioner] did not file a
motion for reconsideration. Therefore, Judge Browning's
decision denying [Petitioner]’s motion stands[.]
4. [Petitioner] failed to cite to any legal authority
which would have provided a basis for relief.
5. Therefore, [Petitioner]’s Motion [to Set Aside] is
 
denied.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
II.
 
Petitioner filed a notice of appeal on September 28,
 
2010.
 
A.
 
Petitioner argued in his opening brief that (1) the
 
Divorce Decree was void because it went beyond the relief
 
requested in the Complaint and Proposed Decree with respect to
 the copyrights, (citing In re Genesys Data Technologies, Inc., 95
 Hawai'i 33, 40, 18 P.3d 895, 902 (2001), Bank of Hawai' i v. Shinn, 
120 Hawai' i 1, 10, 200 P.3d 370, 379 (2008) and Long v. Long, 101 
Hawai'i 400, 69 P.3d 528 (App. 2003)); (2) even if the Divorce 
Decree was not void as violative of Petitioner due process
 
15
         
       
            
       
           
         
            
           
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
rights, Petitioner was entitled to relief pursuant to HFCR Rule
 
18
 60(b), in light of his meritorious defenses;  (3) the court
abused its discretion in entering default against him for failing to travel from Florida to Hawai
'i, instead of allowing him to 
appear by telephone, and (4) the court abused its discretion in denying his Motion to Set Aside because its sole rationale for denying his Motion to Set Aside was his failure to cite “the rule [up]on which his motion was based.” 
B. 
In its SDO, the ICA noted that both Petitioner’s and 
Respondent’s briefs did not conform with the requirements of Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rules 28(b) and 
32(a). 
The ICA noted that under HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), “‘[p]oints 
not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented.’” Berry, 2011 WL 3250422, at 
*1 (quoting HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)). The ICA stated that it “notice[d] no plain error.” Id. 
The ICA nevertheless proceeded to consider the merits
 
of Petitioner’s arguments, characterizing the arguments raised in 
18
 Petitioner claimed defenses included that (a) Respondent admitted
 
in her Complaint that Petitioner was not the father of the children, (b)
Respondent met with attorneys representing the “adjudicated copyright
 infringer” of his copyrights possibly resulting in a decrease to the marital
estate, (c) federal law prohibited the court from involuntarily transferring
his copyrights to Respondent, and (d) there is no evidence in the record
establishing a basis for child support, alimony, or property division in light
of the Asset and Debt Statement filed by Petitioner.
 
16
         
     
          
           
          
              
           
             
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Petitioner’s opening brief as follows: the Divorce Decree (1) is
 
void under HFCR Rule 60(b)(4); (2) violated due process because
 the Complaint and Respondent’s Proposed Decree failed to give him
 adequate notice that he would lose his copyrights, be responsible
 for all debts, and have no assets;
19 and (3) is void because
 
service of the Divorce Decree and Pretrial Order No. 2 was
 inadequate. Although the ICA’s characterization of Petitioner’s
 arguments differs from the specific arguments raised in his
 opening brief, the ICA appears to have addressed the majority of
 the arguments raised by Petitioner.
 
As to the first argument, the ICA noted that HFCR Rule
 
20
 permits the court to “‘relieve a party . . . from any or60(b) 
all of the provisions of a final judgment, order, or proceeding” if “the judgment is void[.]” 
Id.
 n.3. According to the ICA, a 
judgment is void only “‘if the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction over the subject matter or the parties “‘or otherwise acted in a manner inconsistent with due process of law.’” Id. (quoting Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 
Hawai'i 422, 428, 16 P.3d 827, 833 (App.2000) (quoting In re Hana 
Ranch Co., 3 Haw. App. 141, 146, 642 P.2d 938, 941 (1982)). The 
19
 Notwithstanding the ICA’s characterization of Petitioner’s
 
argument, Petitioner argued only that the Divorce Decree exceeded the relief
sought in the Complaint and Proposed Decree with respect to the copyrights.
 
20
 It should be noted that Petitioner did not expressly argue that
 
the Divorce Decree was void under HFCR Rule 60(b)(4) to the court or to the
ICA. Instead, as set forth supra, Petitioner contended that the Divorce
Decree was void because the relief went beyond what was asked for in the
Complaint.
 
17
         
          
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
ICA determined that nothing in the record suggested that the
 
court lacked jurisdiction.21 Id.
 
With respect to due process, the ICA determined that 
although the award of Petitioner’s copyrights to Respondent “was greater than what was originally proposed,” (1) “‘the family court has broad discretion to divide and distribute the estate of the parties in a just and equitable manner[,]” id. at *4 (quoting Baker v. Bielski, 124 Hawai' i 455, 463, 248 P.3d 221, 229 (App. 
2011)), including the power to divide Petitioner’s intellectual property for purposes of equitable division, id. (citing Teller v. Teller, 99 Hawai' i 101, 108, 53 P.3d 240, 247 (2002)), and (2) 
Petitioner “was notified via multiple documents served on him that his copyrights, debts, and assets would be considered in the divorce proceedings” and thus, “received adequate notice regarding the impact of the proposed divorce on his copyrights, assets, and debts[.]” Id. Particularly, the ICA noted that the 
record indicates that Petitioner was personally served with the Complaint and served with Respondent’s Proposed Decree by mail and facsimile. 
As to the second argument, the ICA concluded the court
 
“did not abuse its discretion when it denied [Petitioner]’s
 Motion to Set Aside.” Id. The ICA noted that “[i]n his Motion 
21
 The ICA did not indicate whether it was referring to jurisdiction
 
over the subject matter or over the parties but the ICA must have been
referring to both inasmuch as it resolved the appeal in Respondent’s favor.
 
18
         
         
        
       
        
        
       
       
    
         
        
       
        
        
      
      
         
        
       
       
         
       
       
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
to Set Aside, [Petitioner] presented arguments regarding custody,
 
alimony, copyright, etc., the very issues that were part of the
 proceedings in which he failed to participate.” Id. at *4.
 
Finally, as to Petitioner’s third argument, the ICA
 
determined that “[o]n November 24, 2008, a copy of the Divorce
 Decree was mailed to [Petitioner] at the Military address via
 certified mail” and “[a] United States Postal Service Track and
 Confirm document verified that the document was delivered to the
 Military address on December 1, 2008.” Id. at *3.
 
III.
 
Petitioner lists the following questions in his
 
Application:
 
1.	 Whether the ICA gravely erred in its conclusion that
the Points of Error were not property [sic] preserved
or alternatively whether it erred when it concluded
that no Plain Error existed to reverse the [court]’s
entry a [sic] default decree of divorce that exceeded
any relief previously requested by the plaintiff that
was, in fact, materially contrary to the requested
relief contrary to established precedent.
 
2.	 Whether the ICA gravely erred in its conclusion that
the Points of Error were not property [sic] preserved
or alternatively that the Plain Error existed to
reverse the [court] because a state court lacks the
power to cause the involuntary transfer of a copyright
when federal law preempting state law specifically
prohibits any court from such an act .
 
3.	 Whether the ICA gravely erred in its conclusion thatthe Points of Error were not property [sic] preservedor alternatively that the Plain Error existed in
concluding that the [court] had discretion to enterdefault as a sanction for a pro se defendant nottraveling from Florida to Hawai 'i to attend a 
settlement  conference  w hen  the  record  showed  he  had 
not  received  actual  notice  of  the  continued  conference 
le
t alone the threat to default him if  h e  failed  to 
co
me to Hawai 'i and refused to set it aside because 
the pro se defendant didn’t cite a court rule . 
(Emphases added.)
 
19
         
       
          
              
            
            
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent filed an Opposition to Petitioner’s
 
Application on November 25, 2011 (Opposition). As to
 
Petitioner’s first question, Respondent responds that (1) “the
 pleadings served on [Petitioner] put him on notice that the
 [court] would make an equitable award of [his] intellectual
 property rights that had accrued during the marriage[,]” (2) the
 Proposed Decree provided that the ownership of intellectual
 property would go to Respondent if Petitioner “did not pay
 [Petitioner] her interest in such intellectual property within a
 specified time period[,]” and (3) ownership of such intellectual
 property was awarded to Respondent since Petitioner failed to
 participate in the court proceedings.
22
 
IV.
 
Initially, Petitioner argues that the ICA erred in
 
concluding that his brief did not comport with HRAP Rule 28.
 Petitioner asserts that in his opening brief, he cited to the
 court minutes, which indicated that he was challenging the
 court’s denial of his Motion to Set Aside. The portion of the
 minutes cited to by Petitioner read: “In reviewing
 [Petitioner’s] motion, there is no reference to any rules. . . .
 On the face of the motion[,] [Petitioner] has not cited any [rule
 
22
 In the Petitioner’s Response to Respondent’s Opposition (Response) 
filed by Petitioner on November 30, 2011, Petitioner contends that although
the court’s denial of his Motion to Set Aside is reviewed for an abuse of discretion, a court has no discretion to uphold a void judgment. (Citing Bartolome , 94 Hawai 'i at 428, 16 P.3d at 833.) Petitioner reiterates his 
belief that the Divorce Decree was void as violative of his due process rightssince it exceeded the relief sought in the Complaint with respect tocopyrights. 
20
         
         
            
          
            
            
          
              
             
            
           
             
             
            
        
           
          
            
  
        
           
           
             
            
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
of the HFCR] that would obligate this court to set aside the
 
Divorce Decree.”23 [RA at 11] Contrary to Petitioner’s
 
assertion, citation to the court’s minutes is not a citation to a
 finding or conclusion, which HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) requires. Id.
 
(mandating that a point of error include “either a quotation of
 the finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended
 findings and conclusions” where the point of error “involves a
 finding or conclusion of the court or agency”) Petitioner’s
 citation to the court’s minutes was not included in his “points
 of error” but in his “statement of the case.” 
The ICA was correct that Petitioner’s brief did not
 
comply with the requirements of HRAP Rule 28.
24 However, this
 
court may nonetheless consider Petitioner's arguments on the 
23 Respondent asserts in her Opposition that (1) this court reviews
 
the court’s denial of Petitioner’s Motion to Set Aside for an abuse of
 
discretion, (2) Petitioner delayed the instant proceedings for nearly a year
with “clear knowledge of the [] court proceedings[,]” and (3) thus, there was
sufficient reason for the court to deny the Motion to Set Aside.
 
24 It appears that Petitioner’s opening brief does cite to the record
 
in support of the majority of facts and references to the court, but did not
do so for every single fact or reference to the court. Also, Petitioner
 concedes that he failed to append relevant documents. The ICA was correct
 that Petitioner’s points of error did not expressly allege the error committed
by the court and contained no reference to where in the record the alleged
error occurred or where in the record the alleged error was objected to or
brought to the attention of the court. Finally, while several of his
challenges arguably implicate findings and conclusions of the court,
Petitioner did not cite to specific findings or conclusions in raising his
challenges. Petitioner contends that his citation to the court minutes
 indicated that he was challenging the court’s refusal to set aside the Divorce
Decree.
 
However, HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) requires “a quotation of the
finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended findings and
conclusions” in support of each point of error involving a finding or
 conclusion. Petitioner’s points of error do not cite to a single finding or
 conclusion. The reference to the court’s minutes was in his “statement of
 facts,” not his “points of error.”
 
21
         
         
           
           
      
           
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
merits. See HRAP Rule 28 (“[T]he appellate court, at its option,
 
may notice a plain error not presented.”)
 
V.
 
A.
 
With respect to the questions raised in Petitioner’s 
Application, we first address Petitioner’s third question. Petitioner asks whether it was an abuse of discretion for the court to enter default against him “as a sanction” for failing “to travel from Florida to Hawai' i to attend a settlement 
conference when the record showed he had not received actual notice of the continued conference let alone the threat to default him if he failed to come to Hawai' i” and in denying his 
Motion to Set Aside on the ground that Petitioner failed to “cite a court rule.” The sole argument presented in connection with the foregoing question is as follows: 
The Opening Brief pointed to the error in the findings
citing to both the record and the text of the minute order
that made it clear that the error was based on the [court’s]
erroneous finding that the Petitioner-Defendant should be
denied relief because as a pro se litigant he failed to cite
to a family court rule.
 
While the foregoing argument is indiscernible and could 
be disregarded, State v. Bui, 104 Hawai' i 462, 464 n.2, 92 P.3d 
471, 473 n.2 (2004) (stating that “[i]nasmuch as Defendant 
“presents no discernable argument in support of this contention[,] . . . it is [this court’s] prerogative to disregard this claim”), Petitioner’s argument is somewhat apparent from the question itself. The first part of the third question asks 
22
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
whether the court abused its discretion when it defaulted
 
Petitioner for not attending a settlement conference when
 Petitioner had not received actual notice of the settlement
 conference or the threat to default.
 
In Rearden Family Trust v. Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai' i 237, 
250-51, 65 P.3d 1029, 1042-43 (2003), the trial court entered default against the defendant, a non-resident, after he failed to personally appear at a settlement conference, although his attorney appeared on his behalf. This court viewed “the sanction of a default judgment [as] a harsh one,]” and concluded that the court’s denial of the defendant’s motion to set aside as error. Id. at 254, 65 P.3d at 1046. However, unlike the instant case, in Rearden, the defendant had made “settlement proposals and did engage in [settlement conferences] at the behest of the court.” Id. This court also noted that the plaintiffs settlement 
conference statement was untimely and plaintiffs had also failed to attend two settlement conferences. Id. at 255, 65 P.3d at 
1047. 
In contrast, Petitioner did not appear at the scheduled
 
hearings, the first scheduled settlement conference, or the
 rescheduled settlement conference on September 18, 2008. 
Petitioner did not engage in settlement discussions or file his
 own settlement conference statement. Aside from the Motion to
 Dismiss and Motion to Strike that were dismissed after Petitioner
 failed to appear at the hearings on those motions, Petitioner did
 
23
         
         
             
            
           
               
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
not defend against Respondent’s filings. Petitioner’s Motion to 
Dismiss did not specifically challenge alimony, child support, and equitable division of the parties’ property. Under these circumstances, and where Petitioner had notice that the court would default him in the event he failed to appear at the rescheduled settlement conference on September 18, 2008, the court did not abuse its discretion in finding Petitioner in default. See Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 232, 
909 P.2d 553, 560 (1995) (concluding that “it was not an abuse of discretion . . . to find appellant in default” where the record indicated that the appellant’s counsel had been notified of the rescheduled hearing, although the appellant maintained he had not received notice).
25 
Furthermore, this is not a case in which Petitioner did 
not have notice that he would be defaulted in the event he failed to appear at the settlement conference. See Long, 101 Hawai' i at 
408, 69 P.3d at 536 (concluding that the trial court abused its discretion by summarily entering default against the defendant because “there was no notice to [the defendant] or his attorney prior to the conference that default was being considered”). Petitioner may be charged with having notice of the settlement conference and the threat of default. Pretrial Order No. 2 
25
 Although Petitioner argues that the court should not have entered
 
default under the facts of this case, none of the parties question the court’s
authority after prior notice, to enter default for a party’s failure to attend
a scheduled settlement conference. Cf. HFCR Rule 94(c) (vesting the court
with the authority to sanction a pro se party for his or her failure to appear
at any conference set by the court pursuant to HFCR Rule 37(b), which includes
the authority to render a judgment by default as a sanction).
 
24
         
         
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
indicated that “Settlement Conference is scheduled for 9/18/08 at
 
2:30.” It also stated that, “[i]f [Petitioner] fail[ed] to
 appear at [the] settlement conference, he shall be defaulted.” 
HFCR Rule 5 provides that as to “orders required by its terms to
 be served,” 
“service upon a party [ 26
 ] shall be made by delivering
a copy to the . . . party or 
by mailing it to the . . . party at
 
the . . . party's last known address or, if no address is known,
 by leaving it with the clerk of the court.” (Emphases added.) 
The rule additionally provides that “[s]ervice is complete upon
 mailing.” 
It is apparent from the record, as set forth above,
 
that Petitioner’s last known address was his Military address. A
 Statement of Mailing filed by Brawley indicates that a copy of
 Pretrial Order No. 2 was mailed to Petitioner at his Military
 Address on June 25, 2008. See finding 23. Petitioner continued
 
to file documents bearing the Military address even after
 Pretrial Order No. 2 was sent to him at that address. On August
 6, 2008, Petitioner filed a “First Request for Answers to
 Interrogatories” dated June 28, 2008, and listed his address as
 the Military address. In addition, Petitioner attached to his
 Motion to Set Aside an unfiled letter that he sent to Brawley on
 September 5, 2008 regarding the various documents he had received
 in the case, and that letter once again referred to the Military
 address as his address. Thus, Petitioner may be deemed to have
 
26
 As indicated supra, service was being made on Petitioner because
 
he was proceeding pro se.
 
25
         
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
been served with Pretrial Order No. 2 and provided notice that he
 
would be defaulted in the event he failed to appear at the
 settlement conference. See finding 23.
27
 
B.
 
The second part of Petitioner’s third question asks
 
whether the court abused its discretion when it refused to set
 aside the Divorce Decree on the ground that Petitioner failed to
 cite a court rule. “A court abuses its discretion whenever it
 exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
 law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party.” Id. at
 
253, 65 P.3d at 1045 (ellipsis, internal quotation marks, and
 citation omitted).
 
At the hearing, the court did note that it did “not see
 
any reference in [the] October 9, 2009 [Motion to Set Aside] to
 any specific rule.” In finding “good cause to deny the motion to
 set aside the decree[,]” the court stated, “On the face of the
 motion I do not believe [Petitioner] has cited sufficiently to
 any Family Court rule or statutory cite that would obligate this
 court to set aside the divorce decree.” Conclusion 4 also states
 “[Petitioner] failed to cite to any legal authority which would
 have provided a basis for relief.”
 
However, the court did not deny his Motion to Set Aside
 
solely on the ground that he failed to cite a court rule. The
 court noted that “substantively,” Petitioner was “arguing for
 
27
 Petitioner did not expressly challenge this finding on appeal.
 
26
         
      
        
           
       
     
         
       
          
         
          
               
             
            
               
           
              
          
            
             
              
            
          
           
         
              ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
[HFCR Rule] 60B relief.” However, the court said, “The court
 
nonetheless is denying the relief sought[,]” indicating its
 ruling on the merits of Petitioner’s HFCR Rule 60(b) claims. 
C.
 
Although not expressly raised in his Application, it
 
appears the court properly denied Petitioner’s Motion to Set
 Aside with respect to alimony, child support, and equitable
 division. The court filed the Divorce Decree on November 21,
 2008. Petitioner did not file his Motion to Set Aside until
 October 9, 2009, which Petitioner maintained at the hearing was
 grounded in HFCR Rule 60(b), although he had not cited the rule
 in his motion.
28 HFCR Rule 60(b) permits the court to relieve a
 
party from any or all of the provisions of a final judgment,
 order, or proceeding for the following reasons: 
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could
not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial
 
under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated
intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other
misconduct of an adverse party; (4) the judgment is void;
(5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer
 
28 It is noted that Petitioner maintained at the hearing on his
 
Motion to Set Aside that he did not obtain a copy of the Divorce Decree.
However, the record indicates that a copy of the Divorce Decree was sent to
Petitioner at his last known address on November 24, 2008. Petitioner noted
 at the hearing that the proof of mailing was not filed with the court until a
year after the Divorce Decree was filed. Respondent contended in response
 that she was “not required to send a copy of th[e] decree certified mail to
[Petitioner],” but did so in light of Petitioner’s “history[,]” of apparently
 failing to participate in the proceedings. Although the proof of mailing was
not filed at the time of service, it does indicate that Petitioner was served
at his last known address only days after the Divorce Decree was filed. In
 addition, as indicated in the findings, see finding 27, a “Track & Confirm”
 
receipt indicates that the Divorce Decree was delivered to Petitioner on
December 1, 2008. Petitioner did not specifically challenge this finding on
 appeal. Moreover, Petitioner apparently obtained the Divorce Decree as
evidenced by this response thereto by way of his Motion to Set Aside.
 
27
         
      
        
     
       
             
              
             
          
            
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
equitable that the judgment should have prospective
application; or (6) any other reason justifying relief from
the operation of the judgment.
 
While Petitioner maintained at the February 10, 2010
 
hearing on his Motion to Set Aside that he had “meritorious
 
defenses[,]” Petitioner did not indicate what those defenses
 were, except that with respect to child support, he argued that
 the children were not his biological children.
29 Petitioner did
 
not indicate at the hearing why he had failed to raise these
 defenses previously, or identify which provision of HFCR Rule
 60(b) would entitle him to relief. 
Additionally, Petitioner did not present any argument 
pertaining to these issues in his Application. Thus, Petitioner may be said to have waived his arguments on these issues with respect to the court’s denial of his Motion to Set Aside in the instant writ. See E & J Lounge Operating Co., Inc. v. Liquor 
Comm’n of City and County of Honolulu, 118 Hawai' i 320, 347, 189 
P.3d 432, 459 (2008) (“[I]nasmuch as the parties did not raise these issues in their appeal to the ICA and Petitioner did not raise these issues in its Application, the issues are deemed waived and need not be considered.”) In any event, as the ICA noted, the court defaulted Petitioner on these issues after his repeated failure to appear in this case and these issues were 
29
 It is noted that notwithstanding Petitioner’s argument regarding
 
child support, HRS § 584-4(a)(1) states that “[a] man is presumed to be the
 
natural father of a child” if “[h]e and the child's natural mother are or have
been married to each other and the child is born during the marriage[.]”
Petitioner does not challenge Respondent’s statement in her complaint that she
was pregnant with the minor children (twins) at the time of the parties
marriage, or that the children were born during the parties’ marriage.
 
28
         
        
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“the very issues that were part of the proceedings in which
 
[Petitioner] failed to participate.” Berry, 2011 WL 3250422, at
 
*3. Based on the specific arguments raised in Petitioner’s
 Application, the court cannot be said to have abused its
 discretion in not setting aside the Divorce Decree inasmuch as
 the court found that Petitioner had prior notice of the
 settlement conference
30 and the possibility of default, and
 
appears to have considered Petitioner’s arguments in the context
 of HFCR Rule 60(b). However, as discussed infra, the court did
 abuse its discretion in refusing to set aside that portion of the
 Divorce Decree transferring Petitioner’s entire ownership
 interest in the copyrights to Respondent.
 
VI.
 
In connection with Petitioner’s first question 
Petitioner maintains the Divorce Decree violated his due process rights insofar as he had no notice that the copyrights themselves would be awarded to Respondent in the final Divorce Decree as opposed to only an equitable split of proceeds derived from the copyrights, as reflected in the Proposed Decree. Shinn, 120 
Hawai'i at 10, 200 P.3d at 379 (stating that “the purpose of HRCP 
Rule 54(c) is to provide a defending party with adequate notice upon which to make an informed judgment on whether to default or actively defend the action”) (brackets, internal quotation marks, and citation omitted)); Genesys Data Technologies, 95 Hawai' i at 
30
 See finding 23 indicating that Petitioner received Pretrial Order
 
No. 2 on June 25, 2008.
 
29
         
          
         
         
          
           
          
        
           
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
40, 18 P.3d at 902 (stating that “a default judgment is not void 
for violating HRCP Rule 54(c) unless the violation deprived the defaulting party of due process by failing to provide notice of the scope of the claim and a meaningful opportunity to defend against it”); Long, 101 Hawai' i at 400, 69 P.3d at 528 (stating 
that Rule 54(c) requires that “‘[a] judgment by default shall not be different in kind from or exceed in amount from that which was prayed for in the demand for judgment’”) (brackets in original)). He argues that the ICA gravely erred in failing to notice as plain error that the relief awarded Respondent in Divorce Decree as to the copyrights “went far beyond the prayer in the complaint.” Because we conclude in the subsequent section that the court abused its discretion in refusing to set aside the award of all of Petitioner’s ownership interest in the copyrights to Respondent in violation of federal law, we do not discuss this question. 
VII. 
In connection with his second question, Petitioner
 
argues that the Divorce Decree violates federal law.
31 In his
 
31 Article VI, section 2 of the United States Constitution states as
 
follows:
 
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which
shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made,
or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges
in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the
Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary
notwithstanding.
 
The Supreme Court has explained that state law is pre-empted where, inter
alia, “that law actually conflicts with federal law[.]” Cipollone v. Liggett
(continued...)
 
30
         
           
         
          
           
           
           
         
          
  
    
          
         
        
          
        
         
        
       
          
           
   
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Motion to Set Aside, Petitioner argued that 17 U.S.C. § 201(e)
 
prohibited the involuntary transfer under the Divorce Decree of
 his entire ownership interest in his copyrights.
32 The court did
 
not specifically address Petitioner’s argument in this regard. 
On appeal to the ICA, Petitioner again argued that the court
 abused its discretion in failing to set aside the Divorce Decree
 
33
 because 17 U.S.C. §§ 201(e) and 301(a)  prohibited the transfer
of his ownership interest in his copyrights. Respondent did not
 respond to this argument in her Answering Brief. The ICA,
 relying on Teller, 99 Hawai' i at 108, 53 P.3d at 247, concluded 
that the court had the power to equitably divide the copyrights,
 but did not address whether such transfer was permissible under
 federal copyright law.
 
31(...continued)
Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 516 (1992). The Divorce Decree purported to
transfer all of Petitioner’s ownership interest in the copyrights, apparently
including those “exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright as
specified by [17 U.S.C. § 106]” that “are governed exclusively by [the
 Copyright Act,]” 17 U.S.C. § 301. Under the circumstances presented here,
where federal law directly preempts the application of state law, we conclude
that there are extraordinary circumstances justifying relief under HFCR Rule
60(b)(6). Thus, we address Petitioner’s preemption claim in this case.
 
32 See  page  9  n.13  for  text  of  17  U.S.C.  §  201(e).
 
33 17 U.S.C. § 301(a) states as follows:
 
(a) On and after January 1, 1978, all legal or equitable
rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive rights
within the general scope of copyright as specified by
section 106 in works of authorship that are fixed in a
tangible medium of expression and come within the subject
matter of copyright as specified by sections 102 and 103,
whether created before or after that date and whether
 published or unpublished, are governed exclusively by this
title. Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right
or equivalent right in any such work under the common law or
statutes of any State.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
31
         
 
      
         
          
    
        
       
 
       
        
       ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In his Application, Petitioner argued that the ICA
 
erred in relying on Teller inasmuch as the transfer of copyrights
 
is preempted by federal law. In her Opposition, Respondent did
 not make any arguments regarding federal copyright law and
 instead, urged that the transfer of the copyrights to her was
 permitted by Teller, 99 Haw. at 108, 53 P.3d at 247. On January
 24, 2012, this court ordered supplemental briefing on the
 applicability of federal copyright law.
 
In their supplemental briefs, the parties rely
 
primarily on two cases: Rodrigue, 218 F.3d at 432 and In re
 
Marriage of Worth, 195 Cal. App. 3d 768 (Cal. Ct. App 1987). 
Petitioner reads Rodrigue as holding that “the rights to money
 derived from a copyright [are] subject to equitable division but
 the exclusive rights of ownership remain the unassailable
 province of the author.” According to Petitioner, Worth “held in
 line with Rodrigue . . . that the wealth generated from an
 infringement action, not the copyright ownership and rights of
 ownership bound up in Section 106 [is] community property.”
34
 
34 17 U.S.C. § 106 states as follows:
 
Subject to sections 107 through 122, the owner of copyright
under this title has the exclusive rights to do and to
authorize any of the following:
 
(1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or
phonorecords;
 
(2) to prepare derivative works based upon the
copyrighted work;
 (3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the
copyrighted work to the public by sale or other
transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or
(continued...)
 
32
         
        
     
      
  
        
    
      
        
      
         
        
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Respondent, on the other hand, maintains that
 
“copyrights acquired during marriage are community property
 
subject to California’s marital property laws.” In addition,
 Respondent asserts Worth held the Copyright Act does not preempt
 state marital property law because a copyright vests initially in
 the authoring spouse, but does not preclude acquisition of a
 community property interest by a spouse. Moreover, Respondent
 points to Worth’s conclusion that 17 U.S.C. § 301 “‘reveals an
 intent by Congress to supercede only state copyright laws.’” 
(Quoting Worth, 195 Cal. App. 3d at 777-778.) (Emphasis in
 original.) According to Respondent, consistent with Worth,
 Rodrigue held state marital laws apply to the copyrights.
 
B.
 
Teller, relied upon the ICA, does not address the issue 
presented in this case. In Teller, this court did “hold that intellectual property is capable of division for purposes of equitable distribution.” 99 Hawai' i at 108, 53 P.3d at 247. But 
34(...continued)
lending;
 
(4) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and
choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion pictures
and other audiovisual works, to perform the
copyrighted work publicly;
 
(5) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and
choreographic works, pantomimes, and pictorial,
graphic, or sculptural works, including the individual
images of a motion picture or other audiovisual work,
to display the copyrighted work publicly; and
 
(6) in the case of sound recordings, to perform the
copyrighted work publicly by means of a digital audio
transmission.
 
33
         
          
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Teller involved patents and not copyrights. This court stated 
that “[b]ecause the United States Supreme Court has determined that Federal case law does not preempt the states’ right to impose regulation on patents, we do not address federal preemption.” 99 Hawai' i at 111, 53 P.3d at 250 (citing Kewanee 
Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974)). Teller observed 
that the Supreme Court had declared that “‘[t]he only limitation on the States is that in regulating the area of patents and copyrights they do not conflict with the operation of the laws in this area passed by Congress.’” Id. (quoting Kewanee Oil, 416 
U.S. at 479). Teller cited Rodrigue as recognizing that federal
 
copyright law does not preempt state law in its entirety. See
 
id. (citing Rodrigue, 218 F.3d at 439). But, Teller did not
 address the extent to which federal copyright law preempts state
 law regarding equitable division.
 
C.
 
In Worth, the California Court of Appeal considered the
 
“issue [of] whether the marital community has an interest in a
 copyright.” Id. at 771. The California Court of Appeal rejected
 
the husband’s argument that because a copyright “vests initially”
 in the author or authors of the work under 17 U.S.C. § 201(a),
35
 
the copyright belonged solely to him as the author of the work. 
Worth began its analysis with the general proposition that “all
 
35
 17 U.S.C. § 201(a) states that “[c]opyright in a work protected
 
under this title vests initially in the author or authors of the work. The
authors of a joint work are coowners of copyright in the work.”
 
34
         
          
              
             
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
property acquired during marriage is community property.” Id. at
 
773. According to Worth, then, there is “little doubt that any
 
artistic work created during the marriage constitutes community
 
property.” Id. Because the books at issue were written and
 
published during the parties’ marriage, Worth held the “literary
 works constituted community property.” Id.
 
It was noted by Worth, that the husband agreed that the
 
wife was entitled to one-half interest in the royalties derived
 from the copyrighted works. Id. at 774. Worth construed such
 
concession as reflecting the husband’s acknowledgment that the
 books were considered community property. Id. Hence, Worth
 
concluded that if the artistic work is community property, “it
 must follow that the copyright itself obtains the same status.” 
Id.
 
Addressing the various provisions of the Copyright Act,
 
Worth noted that 17 U.S.C. § 201 “provides for the transfer of a
 copyright by contract, will ‘or by operation of law.’”
36 Id. 
According to Worth, however, although a copyright “‘vests
 initially’ in the authoring spouse[,]’” 17 U.S.C. § 201, “the
 copyright is automatically transferred to both spouses by
 operation of the California law of community property.” Id.
 
Next, Worth considered whether California’s community
 
property laws were preempted by the Copyright Act. Id. at 776. 
36
 17 U.S.C. § 201(d)(1) states that “[t]he ownership of a copyright
 
may be transferred in whole or in part by any means of conveyance or by
operation of law, and may be bequeathed by will or pass as personal property
by the applicable laws of intestate succession.”
 
35
         
  
            ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
In Worth, the husband relied on Hisquierdo v. Hisquierdo, 439
 
U.S. 572 (1979), in support of his preemption argument. In
 Hisquierdo, the Supreme Court considered whether retirement
 benefits under the Railroad Retirement Act that had not yet
 vested could be awarded to the wife upon dissolution of the
 marriage. Id. at 573. The Supreme Court held that California
 
community property law was preempted by the Railroad Retirement
 Act which vested ownership in the retired worker alone. Id. at
 
590; see also McCarty v. McCarty, 453 U.S. 210, 224 (1981)
 (determining that military retirement pay not subject to state
 community property laws); Free v. Bland, 369 U.S. 663, 668-669
 (1962) (determining that U.S. Savings Bonds standing in the name
 of husband “or” wife not subject to state community property
 laws); Wissner v. Wissner, 338 U.S. 655, 658 (1950) (determining
 that a National Service Life Insurance policy was not subject to
 state community property laws, and that proceeds belong to the
 named beneficiary).
37
 
Worth distinguished the foregoing cases from the case
 
before it, reasoning that in those cases, the benefit at issue
 “was expressly defined by Congress to be the separate property of
 the designated recipient.” 195 Cal. App. 3d at 777. In contrast
 to those cases, Worth asserted, “the Copyright Act expressly
 provides for co-ownership as well as transfer of all or part of a
 copyright.” Id. In addition, Worth declared that although under
 
37
 These cases were cited in Hisquierdo . See 439 U.S. 572.
 
36
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 U.S.C. 201(a), a copyright “‘vests initially in the
 
author[,]’” “nothing in the Copyright Act precludes the
 acquisition of a community property interest by a spouse[.]” Id.
 
(emphasis in original).
 
The husband’s argument that California’s community
 
property laws were preempted by 17 U.S.C. § 301, was also
 rejected by Worth. Worth explained that state law is preempted
 
“only if the rights granted under state law are ‘equivalent to
 any of the exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright
 as specified by [17 U.S.C. §] 106[,]’” and because the rights of
 ownership and division of marital property are in no way
 equivalent to the rights within the scope of the Copyright Act,
 California community property law is not preempted. Id. at 777­
78. 
In accordance with the foregoing, Worth concluded that
 
the husband’s copyrights in the books “constituted divisible
 community assets.” Id. at 778. Consequently, “husband and wife
 
remain[ed] as co-owners of an undivided interest in the
 copyrights[,]” and “both parties [were] entitled to share equally
 in any of the proceeds directly or indirectly related to the
 pending federal lawsuit for copyright infringement.” Id.
 
In Rodrigue, decided thirteen years after Worth, the
 
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals similarly addressed whether the
 copyrighted works of the husband were community property. The
 couple in that case, George and Veronica, were married and 
37
         
         
              
          
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
divorced in Louisiana. 218 F.3d at 433. During the marriage,
 
George obtained certificates of copyright for several of his
 paintings. Id. Under Louisiana law, the parties’ marriage
 
effected a “legal regime” of matrimonial property, establishing
 
38
 between them a community of acquets  and gains, referred to as
the “community” and upon divorce, each spouse owned an undivided
 one-half interest in the community property and its fruits and
 products until partition. 
Id.
 at 433-34. 
Upon dissolution of George and Veronica’s marriage,
 
George’s former business associate filed an action in federal
 court seeking a declaration that George was the sole owner of
 intellectual property rights in the paintings. Id. at 434. 
George contended that the Copyright Act preempted state community
 property law, preventing his copyrighted works from becoming
 community property, thereby exempting his copyrights from
 division and partition in divorce. Id. at 435.
 
Preliminarily, the Rodrigue court noted that 17 U.S.C.
 
201(a) specifies that “[c]opyright in a work protected under this
 title vests initially in the author or authors of the work.” Id. 
The Fifth Circuit stated that in contrast, Louisiana community
 property law declares that all “‘property acquired during the
 existence of the legal regime through the effort, skill, or 
38
 “Acquet” is defined as “[p]roperty acquired by purchase, gift, or
 
any means other than inheritance. The term is most commonly used to denote a
marital acquisition that is presumed to be community property.” Black’s Law
 
Dictionary 26 (9th ed. 2009).
 
38
         
       
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
industry of either spouse’ is community property.” Id. George
 
maintained that state law was preempted.
 
Rodrigue stated, “We do not disagree with George's
 
general premise; we do disagree, though, with his expansive view
 
of the scope of the conflict between copyright law and community
 property law, and thus with the extent of the preemptive effect
 of such conflict.” Id. at 435. Rodrigue held “that an
 
author-spouse in whom a copyright vests maintains exclusive
 managerial control of the copyright but that the economic
 benefits of the copyrighted work belong to the community while it
 exists and to the former spouses in indivision[ 
39
 ] thereafter[,]”
noting that such position “is consistent with both federal
 copyright law and Louisiana community property law and is
 reconcilable under both.” Id.
 
The Fifth Circuit began by analyzing the scope of 17
 
U.S.C. § 201(a), which, to reiterate, provides that a
 “
[c]opyright in a work protected under this title vests initially
 
in the author or authors of the work.” See id. (emphasis added). 
Rodrigue construed § 201(a) as pertaining only to a “copyright,”
 the owner of which has “the exclusive rights of reproduction,
 adaptation, publication, performance, and display.” Id. (citing
 
17 U.S.C. 106). According to Rodrigue, “none of these rights
 either expressly or implicitly include the exclusive right to
 enjoy income or any of the other economic benefits produced by or
 
39
 “Indivision” is defined as “undivided ownership in property.”
 
Black’s Law Dictionary  1 594  (8th  ed.  2004)
    
39
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
derived from copyrights.” Id. Rodrigue further observed that
 
the copyright “vests” in the author under § 201(a), but “never
 
uses the words ‘own’ or ‘ownership,’ and the Act does not speak
 of ownership per se or globally, but only in the sense of the
 five exclusive attributes listed in [17 U.S.C.] § 106.” Id. at
 
435-36.
 
Rodrigue determined that the Copyright Act’s “inclusion
 
of only five express attributes of ownership while omitting,
 inter alia, the attribute of enjoyment of economic benefits, and
 Congress’s reference to immediate vesting of the copyright, and
 not to vesting of ownership,” suggested that the “‘vesting’ of
 the copyright and its five (and five only) statutorily delineated
 attributes in one spouse does not preclude classification of
 other attributes of ownership of a copyright as community
 property.” Id. at 436. Further, Rodrigue noted that although
 
the copyright vests “initially” in the author, the statute does
 not speak of a “permanent-vesting[.]” Id. (emphasis omitted). 
Thus, according to Rodrigue, the Copyright Act “explicitly allows
 for subsequent vesting in non-authors, either jointly with the
 author or subsequent to him by virtue of transfer of all or
 lesser portions of the copyright.” Id. The Fifth Circuit
 
ultimately concluded that 17 U.S.C. 201(a), which provides that
 five specific rights “vests initially” in the author, did not
 “ineluctably conflict” with any provision of Louisiana
 matrimonial law that would recognize that Veronica does have an
 
40
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
economic interest in the George’s copyrights. Id. Rodrigue
 
likened that economic benefits flowing from copyrights to
 
“paychecks [and] partnership interests[.]” Id. at 439.40
 
Directly addressing preemption, the Rodrigue court held
 
that the Copyright Act does not mandate “monolithic preemption of
 Louisiana property law in toto” inasmuch as 17 U.S.C. § 301(a)
 “states that ‘all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent
 to any of the exclusive rights within the general scope of
 copyright . . . are governed exclusively by this title.’” Id. at
 
439 (ellipsis in original). According to Rodrigue, 17 U.S.C. §
 301(b) expresses that “nothing in § 301(a) ‘annuls or limits any
 rights or remedies under the common law or statutes of any State
 with respect to . . . activities violating legal or equitable
 rights that are not equivalent to any of the exclusive rights
 within the general scope of copyright as specified by section
 106.’” Id. (ellipsis in original). In sum, Rodrigue held that
 
the “only ownership rights . . . grant[ed] exclusively to the
 author [under 17 U.S.C. § 106] are the rights to (1) reproduce,
 
40 Rodrigue  acknowledged  that  Louisiana  law  governing  marital
 
property  provides  for  “‘equal  management’  of  property  belonging  to  the
 
community”  such  that,  generally,  “[e]ach  spouse,  acting  alone,  has  the  right
to  manage,  control,  or  dispose  of  community  property.”   Id.  at  438.   Rodrigue
 
stated  that  “[i]f  this  general  principle  were  to  be  applied  across  the  board
to  copyrights  created  by  one  spouse  in  community,  however,  an  irreconcilable
conflict  with  the  author-spouse's  five  exclusive  §  106  rights  of  reproduction,
adaptation,  publication,  performance,  and  display  would  result.”   Id.
  
Rodrigue  determined  that  copyrights  came  within  the  exception  to  the  general
rule  provided  for  in  the  Louisiana  code  under  which  the  spouse  in  whose  name
“‘moveables  [have  been]  issued  or  registered’”  “has  exclusive  management
rights  (the  combination  of  usus  and  abusus)  but  preserves  for  the  spouses
jointly  the  right  to  enjoy  the  benefits  (the  fructus )  of  such  property.”   218
 
F.3d  at  438-39.
 
41
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
(2) prepare derivative works, (3) distribute copies, (4) perform,
 
and (5) display the work[,]” “[a]mong the entire ‘bundle’ of
 rights comprising full ownership of property generally, the
 preemptive effect of federal copyright law extends only to this
 explicitly-enumerated, lesser-included quintet.” Id. Because
 
nothing in the Copyright Act governs “the right to enjoy the
 earnings and profits of the copyright[,]” Rodrigue concluded that
 the Copyright Act does not “prevent non-preempted rights from
 being enjoyed by the community[.]” Id.
 
VIII.
 
Worth’s analysis is somewhat problematic. Worth
 
acknowledged that under 17 U.S.C. § 201 a copyright “‘vests
 initially’ in the author[.]’” 195 Cal. App.3d at 777 (emphasis
 omitted). But, according to Worth, “the copyright is
 automatically transferred to both spouses by operation of the
 California law of community property.” Id. at 774. Worth’s
 
analysis in terms of “initial vesting” and immediate divestment
 would seem contradictory. The term “vests” connotes something
 more than momentary ownership. See Black’s Law Dictionary at
 
1594 (defining “vest” as “confer[ring] ownership of (property)
 upon a person[;]” “invest[ing] (a person) with the full title to
 property[;]” “giv[ing] (a person) an immediate, fixed right of
 present or future enjoyment.” (Emphasis added.) 
Moreover, Worth did not address 17 U.S.C. § 201(e),
 
which to reiterate, invalidates any “action by any governmental
 
42
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
body or other official or organization purporting to seize,
 
expropriate, transfer, or exercise rights of ownership with
 respect to the copyright, or any of the exclusive rights under a
 copyright,” “except as provided under title 11” (regarding
 bankruptcy proceedings), “[w]hen an individual author’s ownership
 of a copyright, or of any of the exclusive rights under a
 copyright, has not previously been transferred voluntarily by
 that individual author[.]” (Emphasis added.) As pointed out in
 1 Nimmer on Copyrights § 6A.03[C][2][b], “[a]t first blush, [17
 U.S.C. § 201(e)] would seem to bar any transfers by operation of
 law, thus rendering [17 U.S.C. § 201(d), allowing for such
 transfers] meaningless.” However, Nimmer on Copyrights states
 that “the two subsections can be reconciled” by reading 17 U.S.C.
 § 201(e) as precluding transfers by operation of law only if the
 author’s ownership of a copyright has not previously been
 voluntarily transferred. Because § 201(d) governing transfers of
 copyrights by operation of law “underpins Worth’s analysis,” 1
 Nimmer on Copyrights § 6A.03[C][2][b], and § 201(e) would
 preclude such transfers unless ownership of the copyright has
 previously been voluntarily transferred, Worth’s holding can only
 be reconciled with the Copyright Act by concluding that the
 authoring spouse implicitly consented to transfer of his or her
 copyright to his or her spouse, see id. at § 6A.03[C][3] (noting
 that “[a]bsent such consent, Worth’s holding cannot comply with
 the Copyright Act, and hence would clearly be pre-empted”).
 
43
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Even if this court were to adopt Worth’s rationale,
 
Worth did not set forth with precision, the scope of each
 
spouse’s ownership interest upon divorce. See id. (noting that
 
“Worth raised none of the vexing issues of how transfers of
 copyrighted works should be treated in the context of a marital
 community”). For example, Worth did not address whether the non-
authoring spouse, by virtue of his or her ownership interest in
 the copyright, has the rights set forth in 17 U.S.C. § 106
 (reproduction, adaptation, publication, performance, and
 display). But, dividing those rights equally between spouses
 upon divorce would impinge on the author’s ability to exploit his
 or her copyright and undermine the purpose of the Copyright Act
 of encouraging authorship. Id. at § 6A.04; see also Rodrigue,
 
218 F.3d at 442 (noting “the federal interest in encouraging
 authorship and exploitation of copyright”).
 
Nimmer states that, for example, treating spouses as
 
“traditional co-owners . . . transmuting every transfer and
 exclusive license granted by a married [author] into a mere
 partial grant, subject to rival grants of title emanating from
 the erstwhile spouse” would be a “a prescription for the worst
 disorder.” 1 Nimmer on Copyrights § 6A.04. Thus, to preserve
 Worth’s rationale, Nimmer on Copyright suggests
 “[c]onstitutionally, . . . the courts must invoke a presumption,
 at least sub silentio, that the author-spouse consents to”
 “sharing author status.” Id. To avoid problems raised by
 
44
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“traditional co-ownership,” Nimmer advocates “adding to that
 
presumption a complementary presumption” that the “nonauthor­spouse[] consent[s] to ceding full authority over disposition of
 the copyright to the author-spouse.” Id.
 
It would seem apparent that preservation of Worth’s 
rationale requires legal gymnastics. In light of 17 U.S.C. § 301(e), which prohibits involuntary transfers of copyrights, to hold that part “ownership of a copyright . . . transfer[s]” to the nonauthoring-spouse by “operation of [Hawai' i marital 
property] law” under 17 U.S.C. § 201(d) requires this court to create a legal presumption that the authoring-spouse consented to sharing his or her ownership by virtue of marriage. 1 Nimmer on Copyrights § 6A.04. But, then, a second legal presumption that the nonauthoring-spouse consents to the authoring-spouse maintaining exclusive control over all of the exclusive rights delineated in 17 U.S.C. § 106 would also need to be created to avoid the risk of circumventing the very purpose of the Copyright Act. We decline to adopt this approach. 
On the other hand, Rodrigue offers a means of
 
reconciling marital property law with the Copyright Act. See id.
 
at § 6A.05 (noting that instead of “finding state laws here
 threatening to federal uniformity, [Rodrigue] found a way to
 harmonize the two”). As Rodrigue observes, only “legal or
 equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive
 rights within the general scope of copyright as specified by
 
45
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
section 106 . . . are governed exclusively by the [Copyright
 
Act].” 17 U.S.C. § 301(a). Thus, state law would be preempted
 only to the extent it provides for legal or equitable rights
 within the scope of the exclusive rights under 17 U.S.C. § 106
 (rights to reproduce, adapt, distribute, perform, and display
 copyrighted works). See Rodrigue, 218 F.3d at 439 (“Among the
 
entire ‘bundle’ of rights comprising full ownership of property
 generally, the preemptive effect of federal copyright law extends
 only to this explicitly-enumerated, lesser-included quintet.”)
 
Pursuant to HRS § 580-47, the court has the discretion 
to divide and distribute “the estate of the parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community, joint, or separate[.]” This court has held that intellectual property is a martial asset that is subject to equitable division upon divorce. See Teller, 
99 Hawai' i at 107-108, 53 P.3d at 246-47. With respect to the 
equitable division of ownership interests in a copyright, instead of creating the legal presumptions required to uphold Worth’s approach, we adopt the approach taken by Rodrigue that any distribution by the court must result in the authoring-spouse retaining the exclusive rights set forth under 17 U.S.C. § 106, but that the non-authoring spouse is entitled to an economic interest in the copyrights. 
Although 17 U.S.C. § 301(e) prohibits the involuntary
 
transfer of an author’s ownership of a copyright, the Copyright
 Act preempts state law only to the extent state law governs
 
46
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
“legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the
 
exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright as
 specified by section 106.” 17 U.S.C. § 301; see also Rodrigue,
 218 F.3d at 440 (noting that 17 U.S.C. § 301 specifies a “limited
 preemption which trumps only those common law or state law rights
 that are equivalent to federal copyright”) (emphasis in
 original). Because such a holding would not touch upon those
 exclusive rights under § 106, state law would not be preempted.
 Rodrigue, 218 F.3d at 338 (“[W]e conclude that federal copyright
 law does not conflict with, and therefore does not preempt,
 Louisiana community property law to the extent of denying the
 entitlement of the non-author spouse (Veronica) to an undivided
 one-half interest in the economic benefits of the copyrighted
 works created by the author (George)[.]”)
 
Moreover, the Rodrigue approach comports with the 
partnership model for dividing assets in divorce proceedings, under which “‘partners share equally in the profits of their partnership, even though they may have contributed unequally to capital or services.’” Cox v. Cox, 250 P.3d 775, 782 (2011) 
(quoting Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai' i 19, 27, 868 P.2d 437, 445 
(1994)). As pointed out by Rodrigue, allowing the nonauthoring­spouse to share in the proceeds derived from the authoring­spouse’s copyright is similar to other examples where one spouse retains exclusive management over a particular assert, but spouses share in the benefits derived therefrom. Rodrigue 
47
         
          
       
         
       
        
          
          
         
        
        
          
        
       
    
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
explained:
 
A paycheck issued by the employer in the name of the
employee-spouse alone can be cashed, deposited, or otherwise
negotiated only by that spouse; yet, the proceeds of the
paycheck, representing earnings of one spouse in community,
belong to the community. Likewise, a motor vehicle purchased
with community funds but titled in the name of one spouse
alone can be sold, leased, or encumbered only by the named
spouse; yet the proceeds of any such disposition belong to
the community. And when, during the existence of the
community, one spouse joins an existing partnership or joins
in the formation of a new one, the partner-spouse has the
exclusive right to participate in the partnership and to
manage, alienate, or encumber that interest; yet the
economic benefits-and liabilities-flowing from the
partnership belong to the community.
 
218 F.3d at 438 (footnotes omitted). Some courts, including in
 
In re Matter of Marriage of Monslow, 912 P.2d 735 (Kan. 1996),
 relied upon by this court in Teller, have endorsed the award of
 the entire ownership interest to the spouse with the right to
 control and manage the intellectual property, while subjecting
 “future income generated by the interest to a . . . lien in favor
 of [the other spouse].” 
In sum, the court abused its discretion in refusing to
 
set aside that portion of the Divorce Decree that transferred
 enitrely Petitioner’s copyrights to Respondent, in violation of
 federal law. The Divorce Decree purported to transfer all of
 Petitioner’s interest in his copyrights, including those five
 attributes of ownership exclusively governed by the Copyright
 Act. Hence, to uphold the Divorce Decree would be to ignore a
 violation of federal law. The ICA thus gravely erred in failing
 to notice this error as plain error.
 
IX.
 
In conclusion, the court abused its discretion in
 
48
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
failing to set aside that portion of the Divorce Decree awarding
 
Respondent the entire ownership interest in the copyrights. The
 ICA gravely erred in failing to notice the court’s error for
 plain error. We thus vacate the August 17, 2011 judgment of the
 ICA filed pursuant to its July 28, 2011 SDO, affirming the
 September 22, 2010 Order Denying Motion to Set Aside and the
 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law filed by the court, and
 remand to the court for a determination of the economic interest
 in the copyrights to which Respondent is entitled. The Divorce
 Decree is affirmed in all other respects. 
Timothy J. Hogan,  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
 /s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 for petitioner
Carl H. Osaki,
for respondent
49
 