                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-28516 13-FEB-2014 09:28 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
GERARD R. LALES, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
vs.
 
WHOLESALE MOTORS COMPANY, dba JN AUTOMOTIVE GROUP, JOHNNY
MARTINEZ, and GARY MARXEN, SR., Petitioners/Defendants-Appellees.
 
SCWC-28516
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 28516; CV. NO. 03-1-2415)
 
FEBRUARY 13, 2014
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, AND McKENNA, JJ.,
CIRCUIT JUDGE BROWNING, ASSIGNED IN PLACE OF POLLACK, J.,
RECUSED, WITH ACOBA, J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
Gerard R. Lales filed a civil complaint against his
 
former employer and supervisors for discriminatory conduct he
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
allegedly suffered while employed as a car salesman.1 Lales
 
alleged that he was subjected to derogatory comments about his
 
French national origin, and that he was terminated because he
 complained about the discriminatory conduct. Lales alleged state
 harassment and retaliation claims, federal harassment and
 retaliation claims, unlawful termination as against public
 policy, and breach of his employment contract. All of the claims
 were alleged against each of the Defendants. Defendants asserted
 that Lales was not discriminated against during his employment,
 and that he was terminated because he lied to a customer.
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of
 
Defendants. On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals vacated
 in part and affirmed in part, and remanded to the circuit court
 for further proceedings. Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co., No.
 
28516, 2012 WL 1624013 (Haw. App. May 9, 2012). Specifically,
 the ICA vacated the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment in
 favor of the employer and one of Lales’s supervisors on the state
 harassment and retaliation claims, and vacated the grant of
 summary judgment in favor of the employer on the federal
 harassment and retaliation claims, as well as the public policy
 
1
 Lales was formerly employed by Wholesale Motors Company, dba JN
 
Automotive Group (JN), and his former supervisors were Johnny Martinez and
Gary Marxen, Sr.  The employer and supervisors are referred to collectively as
 “Defendants.”
 
-2­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
claim. The ICA affirmed the circuit court’s grant of summary
 
judgment on the remaining causes of action.2
 
As set forth below, we affirm in part and vacate in
 
part the judgment of the ICA. Specifically, we conclude that
 individual employees are not liable as “employers” under HRS
 §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2). Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s
 judgment on COAs 1 and 2, with respect to supervisor Marxen, and
 affirm the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
 Marxen on those causes of action. 
We affirm the ICA’s judgment with respect to the 
remaining causes of action. Specifically, with regard to the federal harassment claim against JN, we conclude that the affirmative defense set forth in Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998), does not support summary judgment because there remain issues of material fact as to whether JN’s actions culminated in Lales’s termination. We also take this opportunity to clarify that the Faragher affirmative defense is not applicable under Hawaii’s anti-discrimination laws because the administrative rules of the Hawai' i Civil Rights Commission hold 
employers strictly liable for the discriminatory conduct of their agents and supervisory employees. Finally, we conclude that there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether JN’s proffered reasons for Lales’s termination were pretextual, that 
2
 As discussed infra note 9, the ICA’s affirmance on these causes of
 
action has not been challenged.  Accordingly, we do not address them.
 
-3­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Lales produced sufficient evidence to raise genuine issues of
 
material fact as to his state and federal harassment and
 retaliation claims, and that the basis for Lales’s public policy
 
claim is not clear from the record.
  
I. Background
 
The following factual background is taken from the
 
record on appeal.
 A. Discrimination Complaints
 
Lales filed a discrimination complaint against his
 
employer, JN, and his supervisor, Marxen, with the Equal
 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). In a declaration
 attached to his complaint, Lales alleged that he was employed as
 a salesperson with JN Chevrolet from July 18, 2001, until
 June 23, 2002. During that time, Lales alleged that he was
 subject to derogatory remarks based on his French national origin
 by his supervisor Marxen, other supervisors, and co-workers. For
 example, Lales alleged the following:
 
Gary Marxen, the General Sales Manager, called me
Frenchy[], and he wanted that name on my business
card.  I protested, however I was called “Frenchy” on
a daily basis by Gary Marxen, other supervisors and
co-workers.  Gary Marxen frequently referred to me as
a “french bastard”, and told me to go back to my
country because America does not need French people.  
. . .
  
Gary Marxen told Johnny Martinez, a salesperson
who started at about the same time I did, “to go and
kick the ass of that French bastard.”  Johnny Martinez
repeatedly harassed me by calling me “Frenchy” and
telling me that “the French are useless bastards”.  I
 complained about Johnny Martinez’ derogatory remarks
and threats.
 
Johnny Martinez was promoted to Sales Manager in
approximately November, 2001.  Despite my complaints
 
-4­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
about his discrimination and harassment I was
 
transferred to his sales team.  I told Gary Marxen
 that I opposed this transfer.  He responded by saying,
“fuck you, you French mother fucker, then you are
fired.”  I did not want to lose my job so I remained
on Johnny Martinez’ sales team.  While on his sales
 team Johnny Martinez continued to harass me and
discriminate against me.  I protested the
discrimination and harassment and months later was
 allowed to transfer to Carlton Hill’s team.  On April
2, 2002 Johnny Martinez threatened my [sic] me.   At
 the time of this threat Johnny Martinez had just
returned from a suspension for threatening an
electrician who worked on property.  He was again
 suspended for threatening me.
In late May, Johnny Martinez again threatened
 
me. I told Gary Marxen and Johnny Martinez that I was
going to contact my lawyer.  After I threatened to
 contact a lawyer, Johnny Martinez was terminated.
Shortly after Johnny Martinez’[s] termination I
was transferred to Joey Dempsey’s sales team.  Joey
 Dempsey was a friend of Johnny Martinez.  On my first
day on his team Joey Dempsey told me that he was going
to get me fired.  I was terminated about 3 days later.
I was terminated on June 23, 2002. 
The EEOC issued a “determination as to the merits of
 
the subject charge” (EEOC Determination). The EEOC determined
 
that it was unable to conclude that Lales was discharged in
 retaliation for opposing discrimination in the workplace, but
 that “there [was] reasonable cause to believe that [JN]
 discriminated against [Lales] because of his national origin.” 
The EEOC also transmitted the complaint to the HCRC. 
The HCRC subsequently issued Lales a “Notice of
 
Dismissal and Right to Sue” letter (Right to Sue Letter). The
 Right to Sue Letter informed Lales of his right to “file a
 private lawsuit against the Respondent in the State [c]ircuit
 [c]ourt[.]” 
-5­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings
 
Lales filed a civil complaint in the circuit court 
against Defendants. He subsequently filed an amended complaint, 
asserting six causes of action (COA) against Defendants: (1) “discriminatory acts” in violation of Hawai' i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) chapter 378 (COA 1 or state harassment claim); (2) retaliatory discharge in violation of HRS chapter 378 because Lales filed a discrimination complaint (COA 2 or state retaliation claim); (3) breach of the employment contract (COA 3 or employment contract claim); (4) unlawful termination as against public policy (COA 4 or public policy claim); (5) “discriminatory acts” in violation of section 703 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2
3 
(COA 5 or federal harassment claim); and (6) retaliatory discharge for opposing Defendants’ harassment in violation of 
3 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1) provides:
 
(a) Employer practices
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an
employer -­
(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any
individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any
individual with respect to his compensation, terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment, because of
such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin[.]
 
-6­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
4
section 704(a) of Title VII, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a)  (COA 6 or
federal retaliation claim). 
1. Marxen’s motion for summary judgment
 
Marxen filed a motion for summary judgment and argued,
 
inter alia, that Lales did not obtain a Right to Sue Letter
 
against Marxen.5 Marxen asserted that the EEOC Determination and
 
the Right to Sue Letter did not mention or refer to Marxen as a
 
party, nor did Marxen receive notice that he was a party to the
 
complaint. 
In the alternative and citing Maizner v. State of
 
Hawai'i Department of Education, 405 F. Supp. 2d 1225 (D. Haw. 
2005), Marxen asserted that HRS chapter 378 precluded Lales from
 filing suit against individuals. 
4 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a) provides:
 
(a) Discrimination for making charges, testifying,
assisting, or participating in enforcement proceedings
 
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an
employer to discriminate against any of his employees
or applicants for employment, for an employment
agency, or joint labor-management committee
controlling apprenticeship or other training or
retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to
discriminate against any individual, or for a labor
organization to discriminate against any member
thereof or applicant for membership, because he has
opposed any practice made an unlawful employment
practice by this subchapter, or because he has made a
charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing
under this subchapter.
 
5
 Martinez also filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing that
 
Lales failed to exhaust his administrative remedies by not obtaining a Right
to Sue Letter against Martinez.  The circuit court granted summary judgment in
favor of Martinez, and this ruling was not challenged on appeal or on
certiorari. 
-7­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Attached to Marxen’s motion for summary judgment was
 
his declaration, in which he stated, inter alia, that he was JN’s
 
General Car Sales Manager and that his duties included “hiring
 and firing of sales personnel, evaluation of sales personnel and
 managing sales personnel.” Marxen stated that Lales was not
 subject to discrimination or retaliation based on national
 origin, Lales was transferred from Martinez’s sales team because
 of a “personality conflict,” and Lales had not submitted any
 written complaints or made any oral complaints alleging
 discrimination or harassment. Marxen further stated that Lales
 referred to himself as “Frenchy,” and asked and encouraged others
 to do the same. Marxen also stated the following:
 
8.	 [] Lales received his termination notice on June
23, 2002 for missing a mandatory sales meeting
and lack of production in sales.  Thereafter, []
Lales approached me and pleaded to keep his
employment promising he could improve his sales
figure.  Based upon his representations, I
withdrew the termination notice.
 
9.	 [] Lales sold a vehicle to [customers] that did
not have air conditioning but [] Lales
represented to the [customers] that the vehicle
did come with air conditioning.
 
10.	 On June 24, 2002, [] Lales’[s] termination was
reinstated after an investigation revealed that
[] Lales was told the vehicle he sold did not
have air conditioning but he misrepresented to
the customers that it did.  The termination
 notice was changed to reflect the June 24, 2002
termination date and reason for termination as
 lying to a customer.
 
Various exhibits were also attached to Marxen’s motion
 
for summary judgment. Attached as Exhibit D was Lales’s Response
 
to Defendants’ Request for Admissions, in which Lales admitted
 that, while employed by JN, he used the nickname “Frenchy” when
 
-8­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
referring to himself, referred to himself as “Frenchy” in written
 
documents, and he did not submit any written complaints of
 discrimination or harassment by co-workers or management based
 upon his national origin. 
Attached as Exhibit E to Marxen’s motion for summary
 
judgment was a copy of the Termination Report dated June 23,
 2002, in which Lales was dismissed from the company for “missed
 training meeting - 6/17/02” and “lack of production.” Attached
 as Exhibit F was a copy of the June 23, 2002 Termination Report
 that had been subsequently re-dated June 24, 2002, and that had
 additional comments: “lied to customer and the Used Car Manager[]
 causing us to install air conditioning[.]” 
Lales filed a memorandum in opposition to Marxen’s 
motion. Lales conceded that Marxen could not be held individually liable under Title VII, but that pursuant to HRS §§ 378-1 and 378-2 and Hawai' i case law, he was allowed to file 
discrimination and retaliation complaints against Marxen individually. Attached to the memorandum in opposition was Lales’s declaration, in which he stated, inter alia: 
5.	 . . . Marxen referred to me as “fucking French
bastard,” “Frenchie,” made derogatory remarks
about French people, told . . . Martinez to
“beat my fucken French ass,” and made remarks
about French people.  I was also subjected to
ancestry harassment by [] Martinez and other
employees at my workplace . . . .  During my
work at [JN], someone placed feces on my car,
for which a police report was made.
 
6.	 [] Martinez was my immediate supervisor and
referred to me as “French fries,” “Pepe Le
Pieu,” I was told that I stink, that French
 
-9­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
women are just whores, “French are whimps [sic]”
and other derogatory remarks.  I asked to be
 transferred because of [] Martinez’s behavior
towards me which included threats.
 
. . . .
 10.	 I was told I could participate in [a] radio
show, however, this was stopped by [] Marxen who
said he did not want my French accent on the
radio to sell American cars.
 
. . . .
 
12.	 I was terminated for false reasons, specifically
that I did not sell enough vehicles.  This is
 untrue.  The sales statistics show that I did
 not have the lowest sales at the time of my
termination.
 
13.	 I was not told I was terminated for selling a
truck which did not contain air conditioning to
a customer.  I did not see the termination
 
notice . . . and did not sign that notice.  I
 deny that I told the customer the truck had air
condi
tioning.
 
14.	 I was told I was terminated for not attending a
meeting.  However, I was not aware of a sales
meeting and did not recall receiving notice
concerning this meeting.  I have not known
 anybody to be terminated for not attending a
sales meeting.
 
15.	 Before I was terminated, I complained orally to
[] Marxen that I did not appreciate the remarks
made concerning my ancestry.  I also complained
 to my co-workers and others.  I even sought
advice from an attorney . . . about the hostile
work environment and anti-discrimination on the
 basis of ancestry.
 
The circuit court subsequently granted summary judgment
 
in favor of Marxen. The circuit court stated that, with regard
 
to the federal discrimination and retaliation claims (COAs 5 and
 6), Lales conceded that suit against individuals was
 “impermissible.” As to COAs 1-4, the circuit court determined
 that Lales did not receive a Right to Sue Letter against Marxen
 because Marxen was not mentioned in the HCRC’s right to sue
 letter. 
-10­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2. JN’s motion for summary judgment
 
JN also filed a motion for summary judgment. JN argued
 
that it was entitled to summary judgment on Lales’s retaliation
 
claims (COAs 2 and 6) because there was a strong inference that
 JN had no discriminatory motive, and Lales could not produce any
 evidence that he was engaged in a protected activity.
6 JN also
 
argued that it was entitled to summary judgment on Lales’s
 discrimination claims (COAs 1 and 5) because Lales failed to
 provide evidence that he was subjected to unwelcome verbal or
 physical conduct based on his national origin, Lales did not
 follow JN’s procedure for filing harassment complaints, and there
 was no evidence that Lales suffered any injury because of the
 alleged discriminatory actions. Finally, JN asserted that it was
 entitled to summary judgment on Lales’s breach of contract claim
 (COA 3) because it had no knowledge of the alleged discriminatory
 conduct. Although JN requested summary judgment as to all COAs,
 it did not provide any arguments to support summary judgment on
 the public policy claim (COA 4).
 
6 As explained further infra, Title VII and HRS § 378-2 protect an 
employee from discriminatory retaliation.  As this court noted in Schefke v. 
Reliable Collection Agency, 96 Hawai 'i 408, 425-26, 32 P.3d 52, 69-70 (2001),
retaliation claims are subject to a burden shifting analysis, in which: (1)the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of retaliation byshowing that (a) he or she was engaged in a protected activity, (b) his or heremployer subjected the employee to an adverse employment action; and (c) acausal link existed between the protected activity and the adverse action; (2)the burden then shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimatenondiscriminatory reason for its decision; and (3) the burden then shifts backto the plaintiff to demonstrate that the defendant’s offered reason for itsaction was pretext for a discriminatory motive. 
-11­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
JN attached to its motion for summary judgment the
 
declarations of several of its employees and numerous exhibits. 
The declarations and exhibits set forth a version of the work
 environment and the events that led to Lales’s termination that
 differed from the facts set forth in Lales’s declaration. 
Several individuals declared that Lales introduced himself, and
 requested that he be called, by the nickname “Frenchy.” Marxen’s
 son, the Used Vehicle Manager for JN, declared that he
 specifically asked Lales, before Lales sold the truck to the
 couple, whether Lales had informed the couple that the truck did
 not have air conditioning. Lales responded that he told the
 customers that the truck did not come with air conditioning. 
According to the declarations of Marxen, two Assistant Sales
 Managers, and the deposition of the husband, the couple returned
 the day following their purchase and demanded that JN provide air
 conditioning based on Lales’s assurances. 
Attached as Exhibit Q to JN’s motion for summary
 
judgment was Lales’s amended response to the request for
 admissions, wherein Lales admitted that, while employed by JN, he
 did not submit any written complaints to JN regarding people
 calling him “Frenchy” instead of Alex or Gerard, and he requested
 to be transferred to another sales team because he had a
 personality conflict with Martinez. 
-12­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Lales filed a memorandum in opposition to JN’s motion
 
for summary judgment. Lales argued that he established a prima
 
facie case of retaliatory termination and that he raised facts
 that supported an inference that JN’s proffered reason for his
 termination was pretext. Lales also asserted that summary
 judgment was not warranted because he presented material issues
 of fact in regard to his claim of harassment. Specifically,
 Lales pointed to his own declaration, in which he asserted that
 he was subjected to derogatory remarks and slurs about his French
 ancestry and national origin by JN employees. In addition, Lales
 argued that he presented material issues of fact that he suffered
 damages and that he should be awarded punitive damages for JN’s
 “egregious [and] outrageous” conduct. Lales did not contest the
 dismissal of the breach of contract claim against JN. 
Attached to Lales’s opposition was his declaration,
 
which relayed facts substantially similar to those in the
 declaration he submitted in opposition to Marxen’s motion for
 summary judgment. In addition, Lales declared: 
18.	 In late May 2003,[ 7
] I verbally complained to []
Marxen about the harassment and [] Martinez
 
19.	 [] Marxen told me “You Fucking French Bastard,
get out of my office”.  He told [] Martinez to
“beat his F****** French Ass”.
 
. . . .
 24.	 On June 23, 2006, within a month after I
complained to [] Marxen, I was terminated for
false reasons, specifically that I did not sell
 
7
 Lales was terminated in 2002; his reference to verbally
 
complaining to Marxen in 2003 and subsequent references to his termination in
2006 appear to be incorrect.
 
-13­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
enough vehicles by [] Marxen.  This is untrue. 
The sales statistics show that I did not have
 the lowest sales at the time of my termination. 
I was told I was terminated for not attending a
meeting.  However, I was not aware of a sales
meeting and did not recall receiving notice
concerning this meeting.  I have not known
 anybody to be terminated for not attending a
sales meeting.  After questioning these reasons,
[] Marxen changed his mind and allowed me to
continue to work.
 
25.	 On June 24, 2006, I was terminated and told to
leave for selling a Truck without air
conditioning in it.  This reason is false.  I
 did not see nor sign the termination notice
dated June 24, 2006.  I deny that I told the
customer the truck had air conditioning.  The
 sales agreement does not list that the Truck had
air conditioning.  The Blue Book document given
to [the customer] show the Truck was sold “as
is”, without air conditioning.
 
26.	 Other employees told [the customer] that the
Truck had air conditioning in it and were not
fired.
 
Lales also attached numerous exhibits to his opposition
 
to JN’s motion for summary judgment. Attached as Exhibit 11 were
 
excerpts from Lales’s deposition. Lales stated that he
 complained to Marxen approximately one month before he was
 terminated that he was “really tired” of Martinez’s behavior
 toward him, specifically, “the way he treated me, the way he
 would almost on a daily basis threaten me physically to go to the
 boneyard and retaliating against me on a daily basis.” The
 following conversation occurred:
 
Q.	 What did Martinez do to retaliate against you?
 
A.	 To retaliate against me, Martinez would -– the
only way Martinez could pick on me was the way I
was different.  I was different in the bunch.  I
 mean, I was a different person.  I mean, I’m
 French, and I was different.  So he couldn’t
 pick on me at my work, my attendance, so he
would pick on me the way I am.  I’m French.
 
Q.	 Is there anything else you told [] Martinez?
 
A.	 Oh, I told [] Marxen that all this Frenchy thing
already, I was just . . . fed up with it.  It
 
-14­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
had to stop.  And not only that, [] Marxen
didn’t only tolerate this abuse, daily abuse to
me, he encouraged it.
 
Q.	 And you told [] Marxen that?
 A.	 I did.
 Q.	 Is there anything else you told [] Marxen?
 A.	 Yes.  I don’t recall at this time right now, but
we had a good 20 minutes.  Martinez was present.
 
Q.	 [] Martinez was present?
 A.	 Yes, he was.
 Q.	 Okay.  And what did [] Martinez say?
 A.	 [] Martinez said you French bastard, F-you, F-
you, F-you, F-you.  And . . . Marxen told []
Martinez to kick this French bastard ass.
 
Q.	 At the meeting?
 A.	 Yeah, at that meeting one month before I got
retaliated[.]
 
In his deposition, Lales also discussed working on
 
Martinez’s sales team, and then stated that Paul Tucker, the desk
 
manager, transferred Lales to another team after Lales complained
 about Martinez. Lales stated that he told Tucker that Martinez
 was discriminating against him, harassing him, and physically
 threatening him. 
The circuit court granted JN’s motion and subsequently
 
entered its Final Judgment. The circuit court subsequently filed
 an Amended Final Judgment, entering judgment in favor of
 Defendants and against Lales on all of Lales’s COAs. Lales
 appealed the Amended Final Judgment. 
C.	 ICA Appeal
 
Lales’s Opening Brief raised five points of error,
 
three of which are relevant to his application. Lales argued
 
that the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in
 favor of Marxen because Lales had a Right to Sue Letter that
 allowed him to file suit against Marxen for his discriminatory
 
-15­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
actions. Lales also contended that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of JN because the circuit
 court: (1) viewed the evidence in the light most favorable to JN,
 contrary to the legal standard of viewing evidence in the light
 most favorable to the non-moving party; (2) “erroneously ruled
 that when the same actor is both responsible for hiring and
 firing of an employee, a strong inference arises that there was
 no discriminatory motive”; and (3) erroneously applied the
 affirmative defense set forth in Faragher v. City of Boca Raton,
 524 U.S. 775 (1998), to Lales’s state harassment claim. 
Specifically, Lales, citing HAR § 12-46-175, asserted that JN was
 strictly liable for the discriminatory actions of its supervisory
 employees.
 
In their Answering Brief, Defendants argued that the
 
circuit court properly granted summary judgment in favor of
 Marxen because Marxen’s name was not contained in the HCRC’s
 Right to Sue Letter. With regard to summary judgment in favor of
 JN, Defendants contended that “the only evidence [Lales] could
 produce to support his contentions was his own conflicting
 testimony and inadmissible hearsay.” Defendants noted “numerous
 discrepancies in [Lales’s] testimony[.]” Defendants also argued
 that, contrary to Lales’s assertion, HRS chapter 378 does not
 mandate that an employer be held strictly liable for harassment
 by its supervisors. Defendants further argued that the circuit
 
-16­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court properly granted summary judgment because there was no
 
breach of contract and there was no public policy violation. 
On May 9, 2012, the ICA issued a memorandum opinion
 
vacating in part and affirming in part the circuit court’s Final
 Amended Judgment. Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, at *1, *18. In regard
 
to the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
 Marxen on COAs 1 and 2 (state harassment and retaliation claims),
 the ICA concluded that the HCRC’s Right to Sue letter was
 sufficient to authorize Lales to file suit against Marxen. 
Id. at *9. In addition, citing the plain language of HRS § 378-2
 and the definition of “employer” in HRS § 378-1, the ICA
 determined that “an individual employee, who is an agent of an
 employer, can be held individually liable as an ‘employer.’” 
Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, at **10-12. Moreover, the ICA noted that
 employees are subject to individual liability when they aid and
 abet prohibited discriminatory practices, as set forth in HRS
 § 378-2(3). Id. at *10. The ICA then cited with approval the
 
federal district court’s decision in Sherez v. State of Haw.
 Dep’t of Educ., 396 F. Supp. 2d 1138, 1146-48 (D. Haw. 2005),
 because Sherez offered a “persuasive” rationale that employees
 could indeed be held individually liable for discriminatory
 conduct. Id. at *11.
 The ICA also cited cases from this court that “support
 
the conclusion that liability under HRS § 378-2 extends to
 
-17­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
employees in their individual capacity.” Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, 
at *12 (citing Steinberg v. Hoshijo, 88 Hawai' i 10, 960 P.2d 1218 
(1998); Sam Teague, Ltd. v. Haw. Civil Rights Comm’n, 89 Hawai' i 
269, 275-77, 971 P.2d 1104, 1110-12 (1999); and Schefke, 96 
Hawai'i 408, 32 P.3d 52). Thus, the ICA determined that Lales 
was entitled to file suit against Marxen in his individual capacity under HRS § 378-2, and therefore, the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1 and 2. Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, at *12, *18. 
The ICA then addressed the circuit court’s grant of
 
summary judgment in favor of JN. Id. at **13-18. With regard to
 
COA 1 (state harassment claim), the ICA determined that under HAR
 § 12-46-175, employers are strictly and vicariously liable when a
 supervisor harasses an employee. Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, at
 
**13-15. The ICA then discussed the rule set forth in Faragher,
 as applied to Title VII claims. Id. at **14-15. The ICA stated
 
that an employer may raise the Faragher affirmative defense only
 when no tangible employment action is taken against an employee,
 and noted that the defense requires that: (1) the employer
 exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct any harassing
 behavior, and (2) the employee unreasonably failed to take
 advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities provided
 by the employer. Id. at **14. The ICA stated that because the
 
alleged harassment by Marxen did not culminate in Lales’s
 
-18­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
discharge, the Faragher affirmative defense did not apply. Id.
 
at **15. The ICA further stated that because the requirements
 
set forth in Faragher were not met in this case, there was no
 need to address whether the affirmative defense would apply under
 HRS chapter 378. Id. Finally, the ICA stated that the circuit
 
court erred in applying Faragher. Id. 
The ICA then determined that when the evidence was
 
viewed in the light most favorable to Lales, the circuit court
 erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on the state
 and federal harassment claims (COAs 1 and 5), because “the
 matters set forth in Lales’s declaration . . . established that
 there were genuine issues of material fact regarding his
 claims[.]” Id. at **15-16.
 
In regard to the circuit court’s grant of summary
 
judgment in favor of JN on COAs 2 and 6 (retaliation claims), the
 ICA stated that, given the conflicting evidence of the parties,
 which must be viewed in the light most favorable to Lales, there
 was sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case of
 retaliation and that “Lales presented sufficient evidence to
 establish genuine issues of material fact regarding whether JN’s
 proffered reasons for Lales’s termination were pretextual.” Id.
 
at **16-17.
 
The ICA further determined that the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on COA 4 (public
 
-19­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
policy claim) because Lales was not given a fair opportunity to
 
respond inasmuch as JN did not address this claim in its motion
 for summary judgment. Id. at *18. Additionally, the ICA noted
 
that “to the extent that Lales’s COA 4 is based on public policy
 derived from the provisions of HRS [c]hapter 378, it would be
 barred.” Id. However, the ICA determined that because the
 
substance of the public policy claim was “unclear,” and given
 that it was remanding the case for further proceedings, it would
 also vacate the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment in
 favor of JN as to COA 4. Id.
 
Accordingly, the ICA vacated the circuit court’s
 
Amended Final Judgment to the extent that it entered summary
 judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1 and 2, and entered judgment
 in favor of JN on COAs 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6. Id. The ICA affirmed
 
the Amended Final Judgment on all other causes of action.
8 Id. 
The ICA remanded the case to the circuit court for further
 proceedings. Id.
 
The ICA filed its Judgment on Appeal on July 6, 2012. 
Defendants timely filed an application for writ of certiorari,
 and raise the following questions:
 
I.	 Did the ICA make grave errors of fact by (1)
largely ignoring the evidence presented by
 
8
 The ICA also affirmed the circuit court’s grant of summary
 
judgment in favor of: (1) Martinez on all COAs; (2) Marxen on COAs 3 through
6; and (3) JN on COA 3.  Id. In addition, the ICA vacated the circuit court’s
award of attorney’s fees and costs in favor of Defendants.  Id. These
 
determinations are not challenged on appeal to this court and thus, they are
not discussed further. 
-20­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
[Defendants], and only viewing [Lales’s]
“evidence” in the light most favorable to him;
(2) relying on conflicting “evidence” and
uncorroborated self-serving statements submitted
by [Lales] in a sham declaration; and (3)
considering [Lales’s] other inadmissible
evidence[?]
 
II.	 Did t
he ICA err in concluding that individual
employees can be held liable as an employerunder HRS § 378-2(1) and (2) in reliance onSherez v. State of Hawai 'i [Dep’t] of Educ., 396
F. Supp. 2d 1138 (D. Haw. 2005), which has not
been followed by the [United States District
Court] since the Ninth Circuit ruled to the
contrary in a memorandum decision in Lum v.
Kauai County Council , 358 Fed. Appx. 860, 862
(9th Cir. [] 2009)?
 
III.	 Did the ICA err by ignoring a substantial body
of federal law to the contrary when it concluded
that the Faragher affirmative defense cannot
apply where a supervisor’s harassment culminates
in tangible employment action?
 
IV.	 Did the ICA err when it concluded that [Lales]
had submitted sufficient evidence that the
 reason for his firing was pretextual, because
the ICA evaluated whether the reason for
 [Lales’s] termination was objectively correct
rather than whether the [Defendants] believed
that reason was correct?
 
V.	 Did the ICA err when it held that the [c]ircuit
[c]ourt should not have granted summary judgment
on Count 4?
 
(Formatting altered). 
II. Standards of Review
 
A.	 Summary Judgment
 
“On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
 
reviewed de novo.” First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. A&B Props., Inc.,
 
126 Hawai' i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172 (2012) (citing Nuuanu 
Valley Ass’n v. City & County of Honolulu, 119 Hawai' i 90, 96, 
194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)). Furthermore,
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions
on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.  A fact is material if proof of that
 
-21­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting
one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
 defense asserted by the parties.  The evidence must be
 viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party.  In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. at 413-14, 271 P.3d at 1172-73 (citation omitted).
 
B.	 Statutory Interpretation
 
“Statutory interpretation is a question of law
 
reviewable de novo.” First Ins., 126 Hawai' i at 414, 271 P.3d at 
1173 (citation omitted). 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 Marxen was not subject to individual liability under HRS
§§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2) for Lales’s state harassment and
retaliation claims (COAs 1 and 2)
 
The Defendants argue that Marxen was not subject to
 
individual liability for Lales’s state harassment claim (COA 1)
 
under HRS § 378-2(1)(A), or his state retaliation claim (COA 2)
 under HRS § 378-2(2), because those sections do not impose
 liability on individual employees.
9 We agree. The legislature’s
 
inclusion of “agent” in the definition of “employer” under HRS
 § 378-1 did not signal an intent to impose liability on
 individual employees. Instead, by using the term “agent,” the
 
9
 We do not reach the issue of Marxen’s individual liability based 
on HRS § 378-2(3).  See dissenting opinion at 11-17.  Lales did not allege –­
in either his Amended Complaint, responses to Defendants’ motions for summary
judgment, or appeal to the ICA –- that Marxen was individually liable underHRS § 378-2(3), and therefore, any argument now raised is waived.  See Kau v. 
City & County of Honolulu , 104 Hawai 'i 468, 474 n.6, 92 P.3d 477, 483 n.6
(2004) (“‘Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemedwaived on appeal.’” (quoting Ass’n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v.Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai 'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002))). 
-22­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legislature did nothing more than ensure that employers would be
 
liable for the discriminatory conduct of their agents. 
Individual employees are therefore not personally liable as
 “employers” for harassment and retaliation claims under HRS
 §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2). 
It is well established that the “fundamental starting
 
point for statutory interpretation is the language of the statute
 itself.” State v. Wheeler
, 121 Hawai' i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 
1177 (2009) (citation omitted). Where the statutory language is
 plain and unambiguous, this court’s sole duty is to give effect
 to its plain and obvious meaning. Id. As relevant here, HRS
 
10
 § 378-2 (Supp. 2002)  provided the following:
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
(1)	 Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age,
religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital
status, or arrest and court record:
(A)	 For an employer to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or discharge from
employment, or otherwise to discriminate
against any individual in compensation or
in the terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment;
. . . .
 
(2)	 For any employer, labor organization, or
employment agency to discharge, expel, or
otherwise discriminate against any individual
because the individual has opposed any practice
forbidden by this part or has filed a complaint,
testified, or assisted in any proceeding
respecting the discriminatory practices
prohibited under this part;
 
(3)	 For any person whether an employer, employee, or
not, to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the
doing of any of the discriminatory practices
forbidden by this part, or to attempt to do
so[.]
 
10
 HRS § 378-2 has since been amended in ways that are not relevant
 
to the instant appeal.  See 2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 1, § 2 at 793-95; 2011
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 34, § 4; 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 206, § 2.
 
-23­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Because HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2) clearly limit
 
liability for engaging in discriminatory conduct to an
 
“employer,” whether an individual employee — like Marxen — may be
 held personally liable for conduct prohibited under those
 sections turns on the definition of “employer.” 
Section § 378-1 defines an “employer” as “any
 
person,
[11] including the State or any of its political
 
subdivisions and any agent of such person, having one or more
 employees, but shall not include the United States.” This
 language is subject to two possible interpretations. Under the
 first interpretation, an “employer” for purposes of HRS § 378-1
 includes “any person . . . having one or more employees.” Under
 this reading, the definition of “employer” does not encompass
 individual employees.
 
A number of federal courts have adopted this reading
 
and have concluded that the reference to “any agent of such
 person” in HRS § 378-1’s definition of “employer” does not extend
 liability to individual employees under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and
 378-2(2). See, e.g., White v. Pac. Media Group, 322 F. Supp. 2d
 
1101, 1114 (D. Haw. 2004); Maizner v. Haw. Dep’t of Educ., 405 F.
 Supp. 2d 1225, 1237-39 (D. Haw. 2005); Lum v. Kauai County
 Council, Civ. No. 06-00068 SOM/LEK, 2007 WL 3408003, at *2-13 (D.
 
11
 “‘Person’ means one or more individuals, and includes, but is not
 
limited to, partnerships, associations, or corporations, legal
representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or the State or
any of its political subdivisions.”  HRS § 378-1.
 
-24­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Haw. Nov. 9, 2007), aff’d, 358 Fed. Appx. 860 (9th Cir. 2009). 
However, Lales argues that HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378­
2(2) impose liability on an “employer,” and that HRS § 378-1
 
defines an “employer” as “any person . . . having one or more
 employees” and “any agent of such person.” Thus, Lales argues
 that Marxen — as an agent of JN — is considered an “employer” for
 purposes of HRS § 378-1, and is therefore subject to personal
 liability under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2). A number of
 federal courts have adopted Lales’s reading of HRS § 378-1 in
 concluding that a supervisory employee, as an “agent” of his or
 her employer, is a statutory “employer” who may be held
 individually liable for his or her discriminatory conduct. See,
 
e.g., Black v. City & County of Honolulu, 112 F. Supp. 2d 1041,
 1056-57 (D. Haw. 2000); Hale v. Publ’ns, Inc., 468 F. Supp. 2d.
 1210, 1226-29 (D. Haw. 2006); Sherez v. State of Haw. Dep’t of
 Educ., 396 F. Supp. 2d 1138, 1146-48 (D. Haw. 2005).
 
We respectfully reject that interpretation of
 
“employer” under HRS § 378-1. In our view, the legislature’s
 inclusion of “agent” in the definition of employer did not signal
 an intent to impose liability on individual employees. As set
 forth below, the history of Hawaii’s employment discrimination
 law and the legislature’s stated purposes in enacting that law
 give no indication that the legislature intended to impose
 liability on individual employees. Instead, the legislature’s
 
-25­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
use of the word “agent,” “simply represented an unremarkable
 
expression of respondeat superior — that discriminatory personnel
 actions taken by an employer’s agent may create liability for the
 employer.” Lissau v. S. Food Serv., Inc., 159 F.3d 177, 180 (4th
 
Cir. 1998) (quotation marks and citations omitted) (analyzing
 analogous provision under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act).
12
 
Because the definition of employer under HRS § 378-1 is 
ambiguous, this court has various tools at its disposal to determine its meaning, including: (1) examining the context with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning; (2) considering the reason and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it, in order to discover its true meaning; and (3) rejecting every construction which leads to an absurdity. See HRS § 1-15; Estate of Roxas v. Marcos, 121 
Hawai'i 59, 68, 214 P.3d 598, 607 (2009). 
We first note that section 378-1 should not be viewed 
in isolation, but rather evaluated in the context of the entire statute. See Ah Mook Sang v. Clark, 130 Hawai' i 282, 297, 308 
P.3d 911, 926 (2013) (“[W]e must read statutory language in the context of the entire statute and construe it in a manner 
12
 As the Supreme Court has stated, however, “such common-law
 
principles may not be transferable in all their particulars to Title VII.” 
Meritor Sav. Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 72 (1986); Burlington Indus.,
Inc. v. Ellerth , 524 U.S. 742, 764 (1998) (same); Faragher v. City of Boca
Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 791-92 (1998) (same).
 
-26­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consistent with its purpose.” (quotation marks and citation
 
omitted)). In this regard, elsewhere in HRS § 378-2 the
 legislature explicitly and unambiguously provided for employee
 liability, and in doing so recognized that “employers” and
 “employees” are distinct categories. Specifically, the
 legislature imposed aider-and-abettor liability on employees in
 HRS § 378-2(3), which makes it an unlawful discriminatory
 practice “[f]or any person, whether an employer, employee, or
 not, to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any of
 the discriminatory practices forbidden by this part, or to
 attempt to do so.” Thus, as the United States District Court
 observed in White, “the legislature clearly knew how to include
 employees within a statute’s scope and its failure to do so
 explicitly throughout the statute suggests that employees are
 only held liable for infractions under HRS § 378-2(3).” 322 F.
 Supp. 2d at 1114 (quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
Moreover, the history of Hawaii’s employment
 
discrimination law, and the legislature’s stated purposes in
 enacting that law, contain no indication whatsoever that the
 legislature intended to impose liability on individual employees
 other than in HRS § 378-2(3). To the contrary, the statute
 appears to have been patterned on federal labor and employment
 discrimination laws which do not provide for individual
 liability. 
-27­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
The legislature enacted Act 180 in 1963, which made it
 
unlawful: (1) “[f]or an employer to refuse to hire, or employ or
 
to bar or discharge from employment, any individual,” or “to
 discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the
 terms, conditions or privileges of employment” based on race,
 sex, age, religion, color, or ancestry (predecessor to HRS § 378­2(1)(A)); and (2) “[f]or any employer, labor organization or
 employment agency to discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate
 against any person because he has opposed any practice forbidden
 by this Act or because he has filed a complaint, testified or
 assisted in any proceeding respecting the employment practices
 and discrimination prohibited under this Act.” 1963 Haw. Sess.
 Laws Act 180, § 1 at 223-24 (emphases added) (predecessor to HRS
 § 378-2(2)). 
When the legislature adopted Act 180 in 1963, it did
 
not separately define “employer.” It is apparent, based on the
 language set forth above, that the legislature sought only to
 proscribe discriminatory harassment and retaliation by employers,
 labor organizations, and employment agencies. This
 interpretation is confirmed by the legislative history of the
 statute, which states that the purpose of the bill was to make it
 “unlawful for an employer to refuse to employ, to pay less wages
 than other employees, to discharge an employee because of, or to
 otherwise discriminate against a person by reason of his race,
 
-28­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
color, sex, national origin, or because such individual is
 
between the ages of 40 to 65 years of age.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep.
 No. 31, in 1963 House Journal, at 591 (emphasis added); see also
 H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 80, in 1963 House Journal, at 607
 (same); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 399, in 1963 Senate Journal, at
 810 (same); S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 573, in 1963 Senate Journal,
at 866. There is no indication that in proscribing harassment
 and retaliation by employers, the legislature also sought to
 address the conduct of individual employees. 
 
In contrast, at the same time the legislature made it
 
unlawful for employers to harass or retaliate against any
 individual, the legislature explicitly stated that it was
 unlawful for “any person whether an employer, employee or not, to
 aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the
 practices forbidden by the Act, or to attempt to do so.” 1963
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 180, § 1 at 224 (emphasis added) (predecessor
 to HRS § 378-2(3)). In other words, the legislature plainly
 understood how to proscribe the conduct of individual employees,
 and when it intended to do so, it did so explicitly and
 unequivocally. 
The following year, the legislature included a
 
definition of “employer,” which was defined as “any person having
 one or more persons in his employment, [including] any person
 acting as an agent of an employer, directly or indirectly.” 1964
 
-29­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 44, § 2 at 45 (predecessor to HRS § 378-1). 
As relevant here, the legislative history indicates that the
 purpose of the bill was “to provide definitions for certain
 ambiguous terms used in said Act,” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 358,
 in 1964 House Journal, at 355, “in order to avoid administrative
 and legal difficulties.”
13 H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 455, in 1964
 
House Journal, at 381. There is no indication in the legislative
 history, however, that by defining an employer as “any person
 having one or more persons in his employment, [including] any
 person acting as an agent of an employer,” the legislature also
 sought to extend the coverage of the law’s harassment and
 retaliation provisions to the acts of individual employees. 
Indeed such an expansive definition of “employer” would be at
 odds with the plain language of Act 180, which the legislature
 had enacted just a year earlier. 1963 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 180, §
 1 at 224.
 
In 1981, the legislature again amended the definition
 
of “employer” via Act 94, to read as it currently does. 1981
 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 94, § 2 at 184-85. The legislature stated in
 the bill that its purpose in amending the definition of
 “employer” was “to extend coverage of Part I of [HRS chapter 378]
 to employees of the State and local governments[.]” Id., § 1 at
 
13
 In defining “employer,” the legislature intentionally excluded the
 
state and its political subdivisions.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 442, in 1964
 
Senate Journal, at 504-05.  
-30­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
184. This purpose is further explained in the legislative
 
history, which indicates that, in 1963, the legislature had
 
intended “to exclude the State and its political subdivisions
 from the definition of ‘employer’ and instead to provide
 government workers with protection against employment
 discrimination under a separate law.” H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
 549, in 1981 House Journal, at 1166. Because the legislature
 never adopted such legislation, the legislature sought to
 “[provide] the same protection against discrimination under State
 law [], to public employees as is already provided to employees
 in the private sector.” Id.; see also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
 
653, in 1981 Senate Journal, at 1195; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
 1109, in 1981 Senate Journal, at 1363. 
Based on this history of the definition of “employer” 
under HRS § 378-1, and the legislature’s express proscription of individual employee conduct under the aider-and-abettor provision in HRS § 378-2(3), we conclude that in using the term “agent,” the legislature did nothing more than ensure that employers would be liable for the discriminatory conduct of their agents. Federal cases interpreting Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 support this conclusion. As this court has noted, “the federal courts’ interpretation of Title VII is useful in construing Hawaii’s employment discrimination law.” Sam Teague, 
Ltd. v. Haw. Civil Rights Comm’n, 89 Hawai' i 269, 281, 971 P.2d 
-31­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1104, 1116 (1999). “The federal courts have considerable 
experience in analyzing these cases, and we look to their decisions for guidance.” Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Soc., 
85 Hawai' i 7, 13, 936 P.2d 643, 649 (1997). 
The federal courts’ interpretation of the definition of
 
“employer” under Title VII is relevant here because that
 definition is substantially similar to the definition set forth
 in HRS § 378-1. Specifically, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, defines an
 “employer” as “a person engaged in an industry affecting commerce
 who has fifteen or more employees for each working day in each of
 twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding
 calendar year, and any agent of such a person, but such term does
 not include [] the United States[.]” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e (emphasis
 added). 
Federal court cases interpreting Title VII are also
 
instructive here because both Title VII and the legislature’s
 original definition of employer were adopted in the same year —
 1964 — and each definition of “employer” was substantially
 similar to the definition of “employer” under the National Labor
 Relations Act (NLRA). See 29 U.S.C. § 152(2). Indeed, the
 
definitional provisions of Title VII were patterned on those in
 the NLRA. See, e.g., Meritor, 477 U.S. at 75 n.1 (Marshall, J.,
 
concurring) (“The remedial provisions of Title VII were largely
 modeled on those of the [NLRA].”); Albermarle Paper Co. v. Moody,
 
-32­        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
422 U.S. 405, 419 (1975) (noting that the backpay provision of
 
Title VII “was expressly modeled on the backpay provision of the
 [NLRA]”); Low v. Hasbro, Inc., 817 F. Supp. 249, 250 (D.R.I.
 1993) (noting that Title VII’s definitional provisions were
 “based on the language of the National Labor Relations Act”).
 Since 1947, the NLRA has provided that “[t]he term ‘employer’
 includes any person acting as an agent of an employer, directly
 or indirectly[.]” 29 U.S.C. § 152(2). Under the NLRA
 “corporate officers have not been held personally accountable for
 the corporation’s backpay liability absent circumstances
 equivalent to those that would justify piercing the corporate
 veil at common law.” See, e.g., Donovan v. Agnew, 712 F.2d 1509,
 
1512 (1st Cir. 1983) (citations omitted). 
As relevant here, every federal court of appeals to
 
consider the issue has concluded that the inclusion of “agent” in
 the definition of “employer” under Title VII “simply represented
 an unremarkable expression of respondeat superior — that
 discriminatory personnel actions taken by an employer’s agent may
 create liability for the employer.” See Lissau, 159 F.3d at 180­
81 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citing cases from the
 second, third, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth,
 eleventh, and D.C. circuits reaching the same conclusion). Given
 the substantially similar definitions of “employer” under Title
 VII and HRS § 378-1, we agree with these courts that by including
 
-33­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the term “and any agent of such person” in the definition of
 
“employer,” the legislature sought only to impose liability on
 employers for the discriminatory conduct of their agents.
 
Of course, we recognize that “federal employment 
discrimination authority is not necessarily persuasive, particularly where a state’s statutory provision differs in relevant detail.” Furukawa, 85 Hawai' i at 13, 936 P.2d at 649. 
Here, however, HRS chapter 378 and Title VII do not differ in relevant detail. Although HRS chapter 378 reaches a broader range of employers than Title VII, because HRS § 378-1 defines an employer as “any person . . . having one or more employees,” whereas 42 U.S.C. § 2000e defines an employer as “a person . . . who has fifteen or more employees,” the fact that the legislature sought to reach employers with as few as one employee does not demonstrate that the legislature also sought to impose personal liability on individual employees as “employers” under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2). To the contrary, in crafting HRS chapter 378 it is clear that the legislature knew how to proscribe the conduct of individual employees and did so expressly when that was its intent. As noted above, HRS § 378­2(3) makes it unlawful for an employee to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce any discriminatory practice. The inclusion of this subsection supports the conclusion that the legislature did 
-34­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not intend to impose personal liability on individual employees
 
as “employers” under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2).
 
Nevertheless, Lales cites to several cases decided by 
this court, which he asserts support a conclusion that individual employees may be held liable under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378­2(2). However, this court has never squarely addressed the issue of whether an individual employee is an “employer” under those sections. For example, in Steinberg v. Hoshijo, 88 Hawai' i 10, 
960 P.2d 1218 (1998), a female complainant, Linda Louise Gould, filed a sexual harassment claim, under HRS § 378-2(1)(A), with the Hawai' i Civil Rights Commission (HCRC) against her former 
employer, Kailua Family and Urgent Medical Care (Clinic), and her former supervisor, Dr. Harold Steinberg. Gould alleged that during her employment with the Clinic, Dr. Steinberg subjected her to unwelcome sexual conduct. Id. at 12, 960 P.2d at 1220. 
The Clinic subsequently settled the claims against it, and was dismissed from the case. Id. at 14, 960 P.2d at 1222. The HCRC 
proceeded with the claim against Dr. Steinberg and found him liable for sexual harassment. Id. at 11, 960 P.2d at 1219. The 
circuit court affirmed the HCRC’s decision against Dr. Steinberg, and Dr. Steinberg appealed to this court. Id. at 15, 960 P.2d at 
1223. On appeal, this court affirmed the circuit court’s order. Id. at 19, 960 P.2d at 1227. This court, however, did not consider the issue presented in this case, expressly noting that 
-35­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“[t]he parties [did] not dispute that Dr. Steinberg was an agent
 
of the Clinic and therefore an ‘employer’ as defined by HRS
 § 378-1.” Id. at 18 n.10, 960 P.2d at 1226 n.10. 
In Sam Teague, 89 Hawai' i 269, 971 P.2d 1104, a female 
complainant, Yvette Shaw, filed a claim under HRS § 378-2(1)(A) with the HCRC, alleging discrimination because of her sex. Shaw’s claim named both Sam Teague, Ltd., and its president and sole stockholder Sam Teague, and this court referred to both, collectively, as “Employer.” After a contested case hearing, the HCRC affirmed the hearings officer’s findings and conclusions, finding that Employer had engaged in discriminatory practices. Id. at 274, 971 P.2d at 1109. The circuit court affirmed the HCRC’s decision and Employer appealed. Id. at 274-75, 971 P.2d 
at 1109-10. Although this court noted that the HCRC had added Teague, in her personal capacity, to the complaint “[b]ecause HRS § 378-1 [] defines ‘employer’ to include agents of persons having one or more employees,” this court was not confronted with the correctness of the HCRC’s determination in this regard. Id. at 
276-77, 971 P.2d at 1111-12. Moreover, it is unclear what impact the fact that Teague was the president and sole shareholder of the two-person business, Sam Teague, Ltd., had on the HCRC’s conclusion that Teague was an “employer” under HRS § 378-1. 
Lastly, in Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 
96 Hawai' i 408, 32 P.3d 52 (2001), an employee, Charles Schefke, 
-36­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
brought an action against his employer and its owners. Schefke
 
alleged, among other things, age discrimination claims under HRS
 §§ 378-2(1)(A), 378-2(2), and 378-2(3). Id. at 417, 32 P.3d at
 
61. As relevant here, the circuit court granted the owners’
 
motion for a directed verdict as to their individual liability. 
Id. at 419, 32 P.3d at 63. In concluding that the circuit court
 erred in granting directed verdicts in favor of the owners,
 however, it is not clear whether this court was addressing their
 individual liability under HRS §§ 378-2(1) and (2), or under HRS
 § 378-2(3). Id. at 442, 32 P.3d at 86. Moreover, Schefke
 
involved discrimination claims against an employer and its
 owners, and not an individual employee, as is the case here. Id.
 
at 415, 32 P.3d at 59. Accordingly, our holding that an
 individual employee is not liable as an “employer” under HRS §§
 378-2(1)(A) and 378-2(2) does not conflict with our precedent.
 
Finally, we note that generally, in the case of
 
ambiguous statutory language, “an agency’s interpretation of its
 own governing statute requires this court to defer to the
 agency’s expertise and to follow the agency’s construction of the
 statute unless that construction is palpably erroneous.” Gillan
 
v. Gov’t Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai' i 109, 114, 194 P.3d 1071, 
1076 (2008). Here, the HCRC has interpreted the definition of “employer” under HRS § 378-1 to include supervisory employees. See generally Santos v. Niimi, No. 92-001-E-SH (HCRC Nov. 4, 
-37­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
1992) (Hearing Examiner’s Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 
and Recommended Order), adopted by (HCRC Jan. 25, 1993) (Final
 Decision and Order); Tseu v. Cederquist, Inc., No. 95-001-E-R-S
 (HCRC Mar.13, 1996) (Hearings Examiner’s Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law and Recommended Order), adopted by (HCRC June
 28, 1996) (Final Decision and Order); all available at
 http://labor.hawaii.gov/hcrc/contested-case-decisions/. However,
 for the reasons set forth above, the HCRC’s construction of HRS
 § 378-1 is palpably erroneous. The first HCRC decision on this
 issue, Santos, relied on early federal court cases interpreting
 Title VII that held the statute provided for individual
 liability. See, e.g., Paroline v. Unisys Corp., 879 F.2d 100,
 
104 (4th Cir. 1989), vacated on other grounds, 900 F.2d 27 (4th
 Cir. 1990); Hendrix v. Fleming Cos., 650 F. Supp. 301, 302-03
 (W.D. Okla. 1986); Thompson v. Int’l Ass’n of Machinists &
 Aerospace Workers, 580 F. Supp. 662, 668-69 (D.D.C. 1984); Watson
 v. Sears, Roebuck Co., 742 F. Supp. 353, 357 (M.D. La. 1990). 
However, as noted above, these cases have subsequently been
 overwhelmingly rejected by the federal courts of appeals,
 including the circuits in which those cases arose. See, e.g.,
 
Lissau, 159 F.3d at 180 (Fourth Circuit notes that “[a]n analysis
 of Title VII’s language and its remedial scheme leads us to join
 the other circuit courts and conclude that supervisors are not
 liable in their individual capacities for Title VII
 
-38­   
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
violations.”); Haynes v. Williams, 88 F.3d 898, 901 (10th Cir.
 
1996) (“[W]e agree with the majority view that, taken as a whole,
 the language and structure of amended Title VII continue to
 reflect the legislative judgment that statutory liability is
 appropriately borne by employers, not individual supervisors.”);
 Gary v. Long, 59 F.3d 1391, 1399 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (“[W]hile a
 supervisory employee may be joined as a party defendant in a
 Title VII action, that employee must be viewed as being sued in
 his capacity as the agent of the employer, who is alone liable
 for a violation of Title VII.”); Grant v. Lone Star Co., 21 F.3d
 649, 653 (5th Cir. 1994) (“[W]e conclude that individuals who do
 not otherwise qualify as an employer cannot be held liable for a
 breach of title VII.”). Moreover, since its inception in 1963,
 Hawaii’s employment discrimination law has proscribed individual
 employee conduct only to the extent that the employee aids,
 abets, incites, compels, or coerces discriminatory conduct. HRS
 § 378-2(3). As explained above, there is no indication that the
 legislature also sought to extend liability to individual
 employees for harassment and retaliation claims under HRS §§ 378­2(1)(A) and 378-2(2), respectively.
 
In sum, the legislature’s inclusion of “agent” in the
 
definition of “employer” under HRS § 378-1 did not signal an
 intent to impose liability on individual employees. Instead, by
 using the term “agent,” the legislature did nothing more than
 
-39­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
ensure that employers would be liable for the discriminatory
 
conduct of their agents. We therefore hold that Marxen was not
 subject to personal liability under HRS §§ 378-2(1)(A) and 378­2(2) for Lales’s state harassment and retaliation claims.
 
B.	 The circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in
favor of JN on the state and federal harassment claims (COA
1 and 5)
 
The Defendants contend that the circuit court did not 
err in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on the state and 
federal harassment claims (COA 1 and 5). With regard to both the state and federal harassment claims against JN, the Defendants argue that the ICA misconstrued the Supreme Court’s decision in Faragher. In regard to the federal harassment claim, Lales argues that the Faragher affirmative defense is not available in this case because there was tangible employment action taken against him, i.e., he was terminated. In regard to the state harassment claim, Lales argues that HAR § 12-46-175(d) imposes strict liability on employers for actions of their supervisory employees, thus precluding application of the Faragher affirmative defense under Hawai' i law. In reply, Defendants 
argue that the HCRC overstepped its statutory authority in enacting HAR § 12-46-175(d), and thus, this court should follow federal precedent and recognize the Faragher affirmative defense. 
As discussed below, the Court’s decision in Faragher,
 
while applicable to federal harassment claims, is not presently
 
-40­   
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
implicated in this case because there remains a question of
 
material fact as to whether JN’s alleged discriminatory actions
 culminated in Lales’s termination. Moreover, the Faragher
 affirmative defense is not applicable to Hawaii’s anti­discrimination laws because the administrative rules impose
 strict liability on employers for harassment on the basis of
 ancestry by their agents and supervisory employees, and the HCRC
 acted within the scope of its administrative authority in
 enacting those rules.
 
1. Faragher Affirmative Defense
 
In Faragher, the plaintiff, Beth Ann Faragher, filed an
 
employment discrimination claim, pursuant to Title VII of the
 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, against her employer, the Parks and
 Recreation Department of the City of Boca Raton (City), and her
 immediate supervisors Bill Terry, David Silverman, and Robert
 Gordon. 524 U.S. at 780-81. Faragher alleged that the City and
 her immediate supervisors created a “sexually hostile atmosphere”
 at work by subjecting her to, among other things, “uninvited and
 offensive touching.” Id. The district court determined, in
 
relevant part, that the City could be held liable for the
 harassment by its supervisory employees:
 
First, the court noted that the harassment was
pervasive enough to support an inference that the City
had “knowledge, or constructive knowledge,” of it.
Next, it ruled that the City was liable under
traditional agency principles because Terry and
Silverman were acting as its agents when they
committed the harassing acts.  Finally, the court
 
-41­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
observed that Gordon’s knowledge of the harassment,
combined with his inaction, “provides a further basis
for imputing liability on [sic] the City.”
 
Id. at 783 (citations omitted).
 
On appeal to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, a
 
three-judge panel reversed the judgment against the City on the
 
ground that it was not appropriate to hold the City liable for
 the supervisors’ conduct. Id. The Eleventh Circuit, sitting en
 
banc, adopted the panel’s conclusion. Id.
 
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and
 
determined that it was appropriate to hold an employer
 vicariously liable for wrongful conduct of a supervisor when that
 supervisor is using his or her supervisory authority. Id. at
 
786. However, the Court determined that imposing liability based
 on the misuse of supervisory authority conflicted with its prior
 ruling that an employer was not “automatically” liable for
 harassment by a supervisor. Id. at 804 (citing Meritor
, 477 U.S.
 
at 72). The Court, therefore, identified the circumstances under
 which an employer could be held vicariously liable under Title
 VII for the actions of its supervisory employees:
 
In order to accommodate the principle of
vicarious liability for harm caused by misuse of
supervisory authority, as well as Title VII’s equally
basic policies of encouraging forethought by employers
and saving action by objecting employees, we adopt the
following holding in this case and in Burlington
Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 [] (1998),
also decided today.  An employer is subject to
vicarious liability to a victimized employee for an
actionable hostile environment created by a supervisor
with immediate (or successively higher) authority over
the employee.  When no tangible employment action is
taken, a defending employer may raise an affirmative
 
-42­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
defense to liability or damages, subject to proof by a
preponderance of the evidence, see Fed. Rule Civ.
Proc. 8(c).  The defense comprises two necessary
elements: (a) that the employer exercised reasonable
care to prevent and correct promptly any sexually
harassing behavior, and (b) that the plaintiff
employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any
preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the
employer or to avoid harm otherwise.  While proof that
an employer had promulgated an antiharassment policy
with complaint procedure is not necessary in every
instance as a matter of law, the need for a stated
policy suitable to the employment circumstances may
appropriately be addressed in any case when litigating
the first element of the defense.  And while proof
that an employee failed to fulfill the corresponding
obligation of reasonable care to avoid harm is not
limited to showing an unreasonable failure to use any
complaint procedure provided by the employer, a
demonstration of such failure will normally suffice to
satisfy the employer’s burden under the second element
of the defense.  No affirmative defense is available,
however, when the supervisor’s harassment culminates
in a tangible employment action, such as discharge,
demotion, or undesirable reassignment.  See
 
Burlington , 524 U.S.[] at 762-63[].
 
Faragher, 524 U.S. at 807-08.
 
In sum, the Court determined that when no tangible
 
employment action is taken against an employee, an employer can
 
assert an affirmative defense against a claim of discrimination
 by one of its supervisors.
14 However, the Court held that an
 
employer would be held strictly liable for the discriminatory
 conduct of its supervisors if that conduct resulted in tangible
 employment action against the employee.
 
14
 The United States Supreme Court recently held that, for purposes
 
of holding an employer vicariously liable under Title VII, an employee must
show that the alleged discrimination was committed by a “supervisor,” which
the Court defined as an employee “empowered by the employer to take tangible
emplo
yment actions against the victim[.]”  Vance v. Ball State Univ., 133 S.
 
Ct. 2434, 2439 (2013).  In this case, it is undisputed that Marxen was a
“supervisor” insomuch as he had the authority to hire, reassign, and terminate
Lales.  Accordingly, the Court’s decision in Vance does not affect our
holding.
 
-43­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2.	 Summary judgment was not appropriate on Lales’s federal
harassment claim against JN because there remains an
issue of material fact as to whether the alleged
harassment culminated in Lales’s discharge
 
It is undisputed that the Faragher affirmative defense
 
applies to federal harassment claims. In their application, the
 
Defendants argue that the ICA “ignored the substantial body of
 federal case law that permits the Faragher affirmative defense
 even if there [was] tangible employment action.” See, e.g.,
 
Ferraro v. Kellwood Co., 440 F.3d 96, 102 (2d Cir. 2006) (“The
 word ‘culminate’ requires that the tangible employment action be
 linked to the supervisor’s discriminatory harassment. This
 reading comports with the purpose of the test — to determine
 whether ‘the supervisor’s misconduct has been aided by the agency
 relation.’ If an official action taken by a supervisor is not
 part of his discriminatory harassment, it provides no evidence
 that the supervisor used his agency relation with the employer to
 further his misconduct.”). Specifically, Defendants assert that
 there was no evidence that the alleged harassment “culminated” in
 Lales’s discharge. 
Contrary to Defendants’ assertion, summary judgment
 
based on the Faragher defense was not appropriate in this case
 because there existed issues of material fact as to whether the
 alleged harassment by Marxen against Lales indeed culminated in
 
-44­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Lales’s discharge.15 See, e.g., Bennett v. Progressive Corp.,
 
225 F. Supp. 2d 190, 204 (N.D.N.Y. 2002); EEOC v. Safelite Glass
 
Corp., No. 4:10-CV-102-F, 2012 WL 3266333, at *12-*13 (E.D.N.C.
 Aug. 9, 2012) (holding that there were still genuine issues of
 material fact as to whether the harassment “culminated” in the
 employee’s termination).
 
In Bennett, a federal district court analyzed whether
 
to grant employer Progressive Corporation’s motion for summary
 judgment on a Title VII sexual harassment claim brought by a
 former employee, Janet Bennett. 225 F. Supp. 2d at 204. Bennett
 alleged that her supervisor, Larry Mitchell, made unwelcome
 comments about her and tried to have a sexual relationship with
 her. Id. at 197. Mitchell allegedly increased Bennett’s
 
workload when Bennett refused his sexual advances, and forced
 Bennett to drink alcohol while at work or on the job in an
 attempt to get Bennett to have a physical relationship with him. 
Id. at 198-99. Bennett did not report Mitchell’s actions until
 nearly a year later, when she reported Mitchell’s conduct to
 Michael Beney, Mitchell’s supervisor and personal friend. Id. at
 
197-200. Beney subsequently terminated Bennett and Mitchell for
 
15
 Ferraro is not inconsistent with this determination.  In Ferraro,
 
Laura Ferraro brought a discrimination claim against her employer under the
New York State Human Rights Law and New York City Human Rights Law.  440 F.3d
 at 98.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit noted that
Ferraro did not dispute the availability of the Faragher affirmative defense,
and determined that the employer satisfied its summary judgment burden to show
that any alleged discriminatory conduct did not culminate in Ferraro’s
termination.  Id. at 99-100, 102.
 
-45­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
consumption of alcohol on the job, which was against company
 
policy. Id. at 202. Bennett filed a discrimination and
 
retaliation lawsuit against Progressive, and Progressive filed a
 motion for summary judgment arguing that it was not liable under
 Title VII because it satisfied the affirmative defense set forth
 in Faragher. Id. at 196, 202-10.
 
The federal district court analyzed, inter alia,
 
whether the sexual harassment culminated in Bennett’s
 termination, and determined:
 
In the instant case, factual questions remain as to
the true reason for plaintiff’s termination. She
 alleges that the hostile work environment Mitchell
created coerced her, against her will, into drinking,
and that such drinking was used as the reason for her
termination.  She alleges that the real reason she was
fired was not due to a violation of the office alcohol
 policy, but rather because she lodged a complaint
against Mitchell to Beney, and the company used her
violation of the alcohol policy as a convenient means
to head off any problems arising from the sexual
harassment complaint lodged against Mitchell.
Plaintiff alleges, and Mitchell does not deny, that
Beney was friends with Mitchell and his wife, citing,
among other things, Beney’s participation as an usher
in Mitchell’s wedding.  As such, sufficient factual
disputes have been raised as to whether or not the
termination, in the end, was a culmination, or result,
of Mitchell’s harassment.
 
Id. 204-205. 
Accordingly, the court denied summary judgment in light
 
of its holding that there were genuine issues of material fact as
 
to Bennett’s harassment claim under Title VII. Id. at 219.
 
Similarly, in the present case, Lales presented
 
sufficient evidence to raise an issue of material fact as to
 whether the alleged discriminatory conduct “culminate[d] in
 
-46­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
tangible employment action” against Lales. For example, in his
 
declaration, Lales stated that he was subjected by Marxen to
 derogatory remarks and slurs, such as being called “Frenchie,”
 “fucking French Bastard,” and being told by Marxen that he could
 not participate in a radio program where salespersons were
 allowed to get on the radio and announce “slasher sales” of
 vehicles because Marxen “did not want [Lales’s] French accent on
 the radio to sell American cars.” Furthermore, Lales stated in
 his declaration that Marxen told him to call himself “Frenchy”
 and to put that name on his business card. Lales stated that he
 did not put “Frenchy” on his business card because he found this
 to be offensive. One month prior to his termination, Lales
 reported Martinez’s discriminatory behavior to Marxen, and Marxen
 responded, “You Fucking French Bastard, get out of my office[.]” 
Lales said in his declaration that the initial reason given for
 his termination on June 23, 2002, was poor sales performance and
 missing a meeting. Upon confronting Marxen about JN’s rationale
 for his termination, Marxen reinstated Lales. The next day,
 June 24, 2002, Lales was again terminated, this time for
 allegedly lying to a customer. The initial June 23, 2002
 Termination Report was re-dated to reflect the new termination
 date, June 24, 2002. Furthermore, in addition to the original
 reason for Lales’s termination, the re-dated June 24, 2002
 
-47­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Termination Report stated that Lales lied to customers and the
 
used car manager. 
The instant case is analytically similar to Bennett. 
Defendants argue that Lales was terminated because he lied to
 customers. In contrast, Lales’s evidence is sufficient to raise
 the inference that Lales was subjected to a course of
 discriminatory conduct by Marxen that culminated in Lales’s
 discharge, with the alleged lie to the customers serving as a
 “convenient means” for Lales’s termination. Id. at 204-04. That
 
conduct allegedly began with Marxen’s use of derogatory remarks
 toward Lales, then continued with Marxen’s alleged rejection of
 Lales’s complaint to him approximately one month before Lales’s
 termination (which was itself allegedly accompanied by another
 such remark), and culminated with Lales’s termination only one
 day after an aborted attempt by Marxen to terminate him for
 missing a sales meeting and poor sales performance. These
 alleged circumstances are sufficient to raise the inference that
 Marxen utilized his authority as a supervisor to further his
 alleged discriminatory animus toward Lales by terminating him
 after he complained — a situation to which the Faragher defense
 would not apply. Cf. Ferraro, 440 F.3d at 102 (“If an official
 
action taken by a supervisor is not part of his discriminatory
 harassment, it provides no evidence that the supervisor used his
 agency relation with the employer to further his misconduct.”).
 
-48­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Because there is an issue of material fact as to
 
whether Marxen’s harassment culminated in Lales’s discharge, the
 
circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN
 on the federal harassment claim (COA 5).
16
 
3.	 Summary judgment was not appropriate on Lales’s state
harassment claim against JN because HAR § 12-46-175(d)
imposes strict liability on an employer for the
discriminatory conduct of its supervisory employees
 
Lales argues that the Faragher affirmative defense is
 
not applicable to the state harassment claim because HAR § 12-46­
175(d) imposes strict liability on employers for actions of their
 supervisory employees. Defendants, however, argue that the HCRC
 overstepped its statutory authority in enacting HAR § 12-46­175(d), and thus, the Faragher affirmative defense should be
 adopted. 
As explained below, HAR § 12-46-175(d) does not
 
contradict or conflict with HRS chapter 378, and the HCRC did not
 overstep its statutory authority in imposing strict liability on
 employers for the discriminatory actions of their supervisors. 
Therefore, the Faragher affirmative defense is not applicable to
 the state harassment claim.
 
16 The ICA determined, “Here, because the alleged harassment by
 
Marxen did culminate in Lales’s discharge, the Faragher affirmative defense
did not apply.”   Lales, 2012 WL 1624013, at *15.  To the extent this statement
 
appears to resolve a factual dispute, it would not be proper in reviewing a
motion for summary judgment.  See Rodriguez v. Nishiki, 65 Haw. 430, 439, 653
P.2d 1145, 1151 (1982) (“It is not within the province of the trial court at
summary judgment to resolve factual disputes.”).  Nevertheless, the ICA did
not err in vacating the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment on the
harassment claims (COAs 1 and 5) because Lales provided sufficient evidence to
raise a genuine issue of material fact.
 
-49­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Pursuant to statutory authority, see HRS § 368-3(9)
 
(Supp. 2002) (noting that the HCRC has the authority to “adopt
 
rules under chapter 91”), the HCRC adopted HAR § 12-46-175, which
 provides, in relevant part:
 
(d)	 An employer is responsible for its acts and
those of its agents and supervisory employees
with respect to harassment on the basis of
ancestry regardless of whether the specific acts
complained of were authorized or even forbidden
by the employer and regardless of whether the
employer knew or should have known of their
occurrence.  The [HCRC] will examine the
circumstances of the particular employment
relationship and the job functions performed by
the individual in determining whether an
individual acts in a supervisory or agency
capacity.
 
(e)	 With respect to conduct between fellow
employees, an employer shall be responsible for
acts of harassment in the workplace on the basis
of ancestry, where the employer, its agent, or
supervisory employee, knows or should have known
of the conduct, unless the employer can show
that it took immediate and appropriate
corrective action.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
HAR § 12-46-175 provides the requirements for an
 
ancestry harassment claim, and specifically distinguishes between
 
supervisory liability and co-worker liability. See HAR §§ 12-46­
175(d) and (e). On one hand, HAR § 12-46-175(d) imposes strict
 liability on employers for actions of their supervisory employees
 for ancestry harassment, regardless of whether the acts were
 forbidden or whether the employer knew about this conduct. On
 the other hand, HAR § 12-46-175(e) imposes liability for conduct
 between fellow employees only if the employer, its agents, or
 
-50­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
supervisory employees knew or should have known of the
 
harassment.
 
“It is axiomatic that an administrative rule cannot
 
contradict or conflict with the statute it attempts to
 implement.” Agsalud v. Blalack, 67 Haw. 588, 591, 699 P.2d 17,
 
19 (1985) (citations omitted). Furthermore, an agency’s
 authority to promulgate rules “is limited to enacting rules which
 carry out and further the purposes of the legislation and do not
 enlarge, alter, or restrict the provisions of the act being
 administered.” Puana v. Sunn, 69 Haw. 187, 189, 737 P.2d 867,
 
870 (1987). Here, there are no statutory provisions that
 preclude the HCRC from imposing strict liability on an employer
 for the actions of its supervisory employees. To the contrary,
 and as explained further infra, the statutory language provides
 the HCRC with broad rulemaking authority that authorized the
 promulgation of the rule at issue here.
 
From its inception, the HCRC was given broad authority 
to create rules to enforce the State’s anti-discrimination laws. In 1988, the legislature enacted the Hawai' i Civil Rights Act. 
1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 387. The intent of the Hawai'i Civil Rights Act was to “preserve all existing rights and 
remedies” of the various state anti-discrimination laws,
17 and to 
17
 At the time, the State’s Department of Labor and Industrial
 
Relations was the entity tasked with enforcing Hawaii’s anti-discrimination
laws.  Under the department’s administrative regulations at the time,
(continued...)
 
-51­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“provide a mechanism which provides for a uniform procedure for
 
the enforcement of the State’s discrimination laws.” 1988 Haw.
 Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 387 (emphasis added); HRS § 368-1. To
 effectuate this intent, the legislature created the HCRC. The
 powers and functions of the HCRC include “adopt[ing] rules under
 chapter 91.” HRS § 368-3.
 
In addition, the legislature provided the HCRC with
 
broad discretion to order remedies for violations of the anti­discrimination laws, including: “[h]iring, reinstatement, or
 upgrading of employees with or without back pay[,]” HRS § 368­17(a)(1) (Supp. 2002), requiring “[r]eporting as to the manner of
 compliance[,]” HRS § 368-17(a)(6) (Supp. 2002), and ordering
 “[o]ther relief the commission or the court deem[ed]
 appropriate.” HRS § 368-17(a)(10) (Supp. 2002).
 
Thus, the legislature granted the HCRC broad authority
 
to promulgate and enforce rules that effectuate the State’s anti­discrimination laws.
18 Indeed, this court has held,
 
an administrative agency can only wield powers
expressly or implicitly granted to it by statute. 
However, it is well established that an administrative
agency’s authority includes those implied powers that
 
17(...continued)
employers were held strictly liable for the actions of their supervisory
employees.  See HAR § 12-23-115(d) (1986).
 
18
 The HCRC’s authority to promulgate rules is not without 
restrictions.  Indeed, this court has stated that the HCRC exceeded itsstatutory authority in promulgating a regulation that allowed its executivedirector or any interested person to petition the commission for a declaratoryruling because that rule conflicted with a statutory provision.  RGIS 
Inventory Specialist v. Haw. Civil Rights Comm’n, 104 Hawai 'i 158, 161, 86 
P.3d 449, 452 (2004). 
-52­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
are reasonably necessary to carry out the powers
expressly granted.  The reason for implied powers is
that, as a practical matter, the legislature cannot
foresee all the problems incidental to carrying out
the duties and responsibilities of the agency.
 
Haole v. State, 111 Hawai' i 144, 152, 140 P.3d 377, 385 (2006) 
(citation omitted). 
The HCRC rules implicated in this case were “reasonably 
necessary” in interpreting the statute. For example, the 
legislature did not define the extent of an employer’s liability or provide any defenses for discriminatory conduct. To “carry out” its power of providing a “uniform procedure for the enforcement of the State’s discrimination laws[,]” HRS § 368-1, it was “reasonably necessary” for the HCRC to clarify these gaps left in the statute. Haole, 111 Hawai' i at 152, 140 P.3d at 385. 
With regard to HAR §§ 12-46-175(d) and (e), the HCRC 
clarified the extent to which an employer could be held liable for the actions of its employees, by providing that an employer could be strictly liable for the discriminatory conduct of its supervisory employees. It was within the HCRC’s power to distinguish between supervisory employees and co-workers, Haole, 111 Hawai' i at 152, 140 P.3d at 385, and in so doing, the HCRC 
furthered the purpose of Hawaii’s anti-discrimination statute. For the same reasons, these rules do not “enlarge, alter, or restrict” the provisions of HRS § 378-2. Again, the HCRC’s rules 
-53­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
merely interpreted the statute to effectuate the legislative
 
purpose.19 See Puana, 69 Haw. at 189, 737 P.2d at 870.
 
Because the HCRC is tasked with enforcing the mandates
 
of HRS § 378-2, and the extent of an employer’s liability for the
 conduct of supervisors and co-workers is not defined by statute,
 the HCRC’s interpretation should be given deference. See Gillan,
 
119 Hawai' i at 114, 194 P.3d at 1076 (“[I]n the case of . . . 
ambiguous statutory language, the applicable standard of review
 regarding an agency’s interpretation of its own governing statute
 requires this court to defer to the agency’s expertise and to
 follow the agency’s construction of the statute unless that
 construction is palpably erroneous.”); In re Water Use Permit
 Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 144, 9 P.3d 409, 456 (2009) 
19 The dissenting opinion relies on the Restatement (Second) of
 
Agency § 219 (1958) to conclude that HAR § 12-46-175(d) exceeds the scope of
the HCRC’s authority.  Dissenting opinion at 34-44.  Respectfully, however,
HAR § 12-46-175(d) is consistent with the theory of agency set forth in the
Second Restatement.  As the dissenting opinion notes, see dissenting opinion
at 39-40, § 219(d) subjects an employer to liability for the conduct of a
supervisory employee where, inter alia, that employee was “aided in
accomplishing the tort by the existence of the agency relation.”  Similarly,
HAR § 12-46-175(d) provides that the HCRC “will examine the circumstances of
the particular employment relationship and the job functions performed by the
individual in determining whether an individual acts in a supervisory or
agency capacity.”  In other words, by its express terms, HAR § 12-46-175(d)
provides that the HCRC must determine whether the supervisory employee was
“aided . . . by the existence of the agency relation” before strict liability
will be imposed, and does not, as the dissenting opinion suggests, “render[]
employers liable for the tortious actions of their employees that may not have
been aided by the supervisory status of the offending employees.”  Dissenting
 opinion at 45.
Thus, under the plain language of the rule, the liability of
employers for the acts of supervisors is not limitless.  For example, where “a
supervisor has no authority over an employee, because the two work in wholly
different parts of the employer’s business, it may be improper to find strict
employer liability.”   Meritor, 477 U.S. at 77 (Marshall, J., concurring).  The
 
last sentence of HAR § 12-46-175(d) appropriately accounts for such a
situation.
 
-54­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(“[W]here an administrative agency is charged with the
 
responsibility of carrying out the mandate of a statute which
 contains words of broad and indefinite meaning, courts accord
 persuasive weight to administrative construction and follow the
 same, unless the construction is palpably erroneous.” (citation
 omitted)). It is not “palpably erroneous” for the HCRC to
 interpret HRS § 378-2 to impose strict liability on employers for
 the discriminatory conduct of its supervisors. See,
 
e.g., Meritor, 477 U.S. at 76-77 (Marshall, J., concurring)
 (“[I]t is the authority vested in the supervisor by the employer
 that enables him to commit the wrong: it is precisely because the
 supervisor is understood to be clothed with the employer’s
 authority that he is able to impose unwelcome sexual conduct on
 subordinates.”).
 
Moreover, HRS § 368-1 provides that the intent of the 
Hawai'i Civil Rights Act, and its creation of the HCRC, was to 
“preserve all existing rights and remedies” of the various state anti-discrimination laws.” 1988 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 219, § 1 at 387 (emphasis added); HRS § 368-1 (emphasis added). In this regard, prior to the creation of the HCRC, the administrative rules of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations — the agency formerly tasked with enforcing Hawaii’s anti­discrimination laws — held employers strictly liable for the discriminatory actions of their supervisory employees. 
-55­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
HAR § 12-23-115(d) (1986) provided:
 
An employer is responsible for its acts and those of
its agents and supervisory employees with respect to
harassment on the basis of ancestry regardless of
whether the specific acts complained of were
authorized or even forbidden by the employer and
regardless of whether the employer knew or should have
known of their occurrence.  The department will
examine the circumstances of the particular employment
relationship and the job functions performed by the
individual in determining whether an individual acts
in a supervisory or agency capacity.
 
The current language of HAR § 12-46-175(d), which the
 
HCRC adopted in 1990, is nearly identical to the language of HAR
 
20
 § 12-23-115(d),  which existed prior to the creation of the
HCRC. 
When the legislature created the HCRC in 1988, it did not
 
expressly preclude the HCRC from imposing strict liability on
 
employers for the actions of their supervisory employees, as was
 already authorized under the existing administrative rules of the
 Department of Labor and Industrial Relations. Given that one of
 the purposes of creating the HCRC was to “preserve all existing
 rights and remedies,” and that the legislature did not expressly
 foreclose the HCRC from adopting the then existing anti­discrimination rights and remedies, the HCRC did not violate its
 statutory mandate in adopting HAR § 12-46-175(d).
 
In sum, HAR § 12-46-175(d) imposes strict liability on
 
employers for the discriminatory conduct of their supervisory
 employees, and thus, the Faragher affirmative defense is not
 
20
 The only difference between the two regulations is the reference
 
to the “department” in HAR § 12-23-115(d) and “commission” in HAR § 12-46­
175(d).
 
-56­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
applicable to HRS chapter 378.21 Accordingly, the circuit court
 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales’s
 
state harassment claim.
 
C.	 There were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
JN’s proffered reasons for Lales’s termination were
pretextual (COAs 2 and 6)
 
In Schefke, this court adopted a tripartite burden-
shifting test for retaliation claims under HRS § 378-2(2):
 
(1) the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie
case of such retaliation by demonstrating that (a) the
plaintiff (i) “has opposed any practice forbidden by
HRS chapter 378, Employment Practices, Part I,
Discriminatory Practices or (ii) has filed a
complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding
respecting the discriminatory practices prohibited
under this part,” (b) his or her “employer, labor
organization, or employment agency has . . .
discharged, expelled, or otherwise discriminated
against the plaintiff,” and (c) “a causal link has
existed between the protected activity and the adverse
action;” (2) if the plaintiff establishes a prima
facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the
defendant to provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for the adverse employment action; and (3) if
the defendant articulates such a reason, the burden
shifts back to the plaintiff to show evidence
demonstrating that the reason given by the defendant
is pretextual.
 
96 Hawai' i at 426, 32 P.3d at 70 (brackets and citations 
omitted).
 
Similarly, this court described the burden shifting
 
test for retaliation claims brought under Title VII:
 
21
 Contrary to the dissent’s suggestion, HAR § 12-46-175(d) indeed
 
allows the HCRC to conduct a case-by-case determination of whether the acts of
a supervisor subject the employer to liability.  See dissenting opinion at 42­43. As noted above, the HCRC is required to examine the “circumstances” of
the employment relationship to determine whether the individual acts in a
supervisory or agency capacity.  HAR § 12-46-175(d).  An examination of the
 “circumstances” necessitates analyzing whether the acts of the supervisor
appropriately subject the employer to liability.
 
-57­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e-1 to 2000e-17 (1994), . . . federal
courts have held that, in a prima facie case of
retaliation, an employee must show that (1) he or she
engaged in a protected activity; (2) his or her
employer subjected him or her to an adverse employment
action; and (3) a causal link existed between the
protected activity and the adverse action.  If a
 plaintiff has asserted a prima facie retaliation
claim, the burden shifts to the defendant to
articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for
its decision.  If the defendant articulates such a
 reason, the plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of
demonstrating that the reason was merely a pretext for
a discriminatory motive.
 
Schefke, 96 Hawai' i at 425, 32 P.3d at 69 (brackets and citations 
omitted). 
Defendants argue that Lales did not submit sufficient
 
evidence regarding his state and federal retaliation claims to
 
create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether JN’s reason
 for his firing was pretextual. As discussed further below,
 Defendants’ argument is without merit.
 
Because it is not now disputed that Lales established a 
prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifted to JN to provide a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for Lales’s termination. Schefke, 96 Hawai' i at 426, 32 P.3d at 70. 
Defendants argued that JN’s legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Lales was that Lales lied to customers when telling them that there was air conditioning in a truck that he sold to them. See Tex. Dep’t of Comm. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 
U.S. 248, 256 (1981) (“[T]he employer’s burden is satisfied if he
 simply ‘explains what he has done’ or ‘produc[es] evidence of
 
-58­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons.’”). Lales asserts that
 
this reason was pretextual.
 
Although Defendants presented evidence that
 
contradicted Lales’s evidence, Lales’s evidence created genuine
 issues of material fact regarding whether JN’s reasons for
 Lales’s termination were pretextual. In his declaration attached
 to his opposition to JN’s motion for summary judgment, Lales
 stated that he was subjected to derogatory comments about his
 ancestry and national origin at JN. Lales further asserted that
 approximately one month before his termination, Lales orally
 complained to Marxen about the discrimination, and Marxen
 responded, “You Fucking French Bastard, get out of my office[.]” 
One month later, on June 23, 2002, Marxen initially told Lales
 that he was terminated for not selling enough cars and for
 missing a meeting.
22 Lales met with Marxen and questioned the
 
rationale for his termination, stating that he had not been
 notified of the meeting and that other employees had lower sales
 than he did. Marxen then changed his mind and allowed Lales to
 continue to work the next day. The next day, however, Lales was
 terminated for allegedly lying to his customers about air
 
22
 Marxen explained that JN regularly uses termination letters to
 
motivate its employees: “A lot of times, our terminations are idle threats.  A
 
lot of times, they’re geared to – they’re used to motive [sic] the people to
get them to go back to work, and laying around and coming in late, that type
of thing, which I’m not saying that’s the case with [] Lales.” 
-59­   
  
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conditioning in the truck he sold them. Lales explicitly denied
 
telling the customers that the truck had air conditioning.23
 
When considering the evidence in the light most 
favorable to Lales, see First Ins., 125 Hawai' i at 413-14, 271 
P.3d at 1172-73, there are genuine issues of material fact as to the whether the reasons for Lales’s termination were pretextual. In Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256, the United States Supreme Court stated that a plaintiff may establish pretext “either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer’s proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.” See 
also Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai' i 368, 379, 14 P.3d 
1049, 1060 (2000) (citing Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256). In this case, Lales’s declaration offers sufficient evidence to raise an issue of fact about whether his termination was pretext for a discriminatory motive, specifically, because of (1) Marxen’s allegedly hostile reaction to Lales’s oral complaint, (2) the temporal proximity (amount one month) between the complaint and the termination, and (3) the aborted attempt to fire him on the previous day, which, given the surrounding circumstances 
23
 Although the ICA appeared to rely on Lales’s statements that other 
employees at JN Automotive told the customers that the car had air
conditioning, and those employees were not fired, [ROA vol. 11 at 170] these 
statements appear to be inadmissible hearsay, Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence Rule 
802, and accordingly, it appears that the ICA erred in considering these
statements.  However, any such error was harmless because there was stillsufficient evidence to raise an issue of material fact as to whether JN’s rationale for Lales’s termination was pretextual. 
-60­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
suggested by Lales’s declaration, raises an inference of
 
retaliatory intent.
 
Citing Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d
 
1054 (9th Cir. 2002), Defendants argue that “the ICA incorrectly
 accepted that the relevant issue was whether [Lales] had, in
 fact, lied to the customers, rather than if the reason for
 terminating [Lales] was false. Whether [Lales] lied or not is
 not material — the question is whether [Defendants] believed that
 [Lales] had lied.” However, Villiarimo is distinguishable from
 the present case. There, the employee, Reloynne Villiarimo, was
 a ramp supervisor for Aloha Island Air. Id. at 1058. The
 
airline insisted that it terminated Villiarimo because she
 violated a rule in connection with an accident that resulted in
 damage to one of the airline’s airplanes, and she had been
 dishonest during the investigation of the accident. Id. 
Villiarimo did not dispute that she failed to perform her job
 satisfactorily, which resulted in damage to the airplane. Id. at
 
1062 n.8. However, Villiarimo maintained that she was terminated
 because of her sex and that the reasons offered by the airline
 for her termination were pretextual. Id. at 1061-63. Villiarimo
 
specifically argued that the airline’s reason for her termination
 changed over time, that three of the airline’s witnesses were not
 credible, and that a state agency had already determined, in the
 context of unemployment benefits, that she had not been fired for
 
-61­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
work-related misconduct. Id. at 1063. In regard to the
 
credibility of the witnesses, the Ninth Circuit stated that
 
Villiarimo’s assertion was “unavailing” because courts “only
 require that an employer honestly believed its reason for its
 actions, even if its reason is ‘foolish or trivial or even
 baseless.’” Id. (citation omitted). The Ninth Circuit noted
 
that Villiarimo did not present evidence that the airline did not
 honestly believe its proffered reasons. Id.
 
Defendants rely on this specific portion of Villiarimo
 
to argue that JN honestly believed that it was firing Lales
 because he lied to customers about the air conditioning in their
 truck, and thus, this court should affirm the circuit court’s
 grant of summary judgment. Defendants’ reliance on this portion,
 however, is misplaced because in the present case, there is a
 genuine issue of material fact as to whether JN honestly believed
 its reasons for its actions, specifically given that Lales put
 forth evidence, through his declaration, that indicates an
 allegedly retaliatory intent on the part of Marxen when he
 terminated Lales. Accordingly, Defendants’ reliance on
 Villiarimo is not persuasive.
 
Accordingly, the ICA did not err in reversing and
 
remanding the circuit court’s granting of summary judgment on
 Lales’s retaliation claims against JN.
 
-62­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
D.	 Lales produced sufficient evidence to raise genuine issues
of material fact as to COAs 1, 2, 5, and 6
 
Defendants also generally challenge the evidence
 
submitted by Lales in opposition to the motions for summary
 
judgment. Defendants argue that because Lales’s evidence was
 “faulty,” the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment should be
 affirmed. More specifically, Defendants argue that the ICA
 gravely erred by: 
(1) largely ignoring the evidence presented by
[Defendants], and only viewing [Lales’s] “evidence” in
the light most favorable to him; (2) considering
inadmissible “evidence” and uncorroborated self-
serving statements submitted by [Lales] in a sham
declaration; and (3) considering [Lales’s]
inadmissible evidence to find that material facts
 existing so as to preclude summary judgment.
 
As discussed below, Defendants’ arguments are without
 
merit, and Lales’s evidence was sufficient to raise a genuine
 
issue of material fact as to all the challenged COAs.
 
1.	 The ICA did not improperly ignore evidence presented by
Defendants
 
Defendants argue that the ICA “ignored” evidence that
 
they presented with their motion for summary judgment and relied
 
only on Lales’s evidence. Defendants point out that the
 background section of the ICA’s memorandum opinion and the ICA’s
 analysis rely largely on Lales’s submissions to the circuit
 court. As set forth below, the ICA properly viewed the evidence
 in the light most favorable to Lales. Moreover, to the extent
 Defendants’ evidence conflicts with that of Lales’s it raises a
 
-63­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
dispute as to issues of material fact, making summary judgment
 
inappropriate.
 
This court has held that, once a summary judgment 
movant has satisfied its initial burden of producing support for its claim that there is no genuine issue of material fact, the party opposing summary judgment must “demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.” French v. Haw. Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 
462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004) (emphasis omitted). “The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non­moving party.” First Ins., 126 Hawai' i at 414, 271 P.3d at 1173. 
Here, the ICA specifically stated that it was viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Lales. Lales, 2012 WL 
1624013, at *1 n.6, *15. The Defendants do not identify any legal authority that would require the ICA to explain how Defendants’ evidence conflicts with that evidence. Rather, the ICA was required to view the evidence in the light most favorable to Lales to determine whether there were disputed issues of material fact worthy of trial. Id. Here, for example, the ICA 
stated that it relied on “the matters set forth in Lales’s declaration in opposition to JN’s motion for summary judgment” to conclude that “Lales was subjected to persistent, derogatory, and unwelcome statements and comments about his ancestry and national origin” and that there were “genuine issues of material fact 
-64­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
regarding [Lales’s] claims against JN for harassment based on 
ancestry and national origin discrimination.” Lales, 2012 WL 
1624013, at *16. These facts were sufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact and were, thus, “worthy of trial.” French, 105 Hawai' i at 470, 99 P.3d at 1054. 
Thus, Defendants’ argument that the ICA erred in not
 
considering its evidence and only relying on Lales’s evidence is
 without merit.
 
2.	 Lales’s declaration was consistent with his prior
admissions and deposition statements, and thus, did not
constitute a “sham affidavit”
 
Defendants argue that the ICA erred in relying on
 
Lales’s “conflicting, contradicting, uncorroborated, and self-
serving” statements to conclude that there were genuine issues of
 material fact. Defendants argue that “[b]ased on the numerous
 inconsistencies and contradictions, the circuit court rightly
 disregarded conflicting portions of [Lales’s] Declaration as
 self-serving and essentially a sham.” As explained infra, the
 circuit court improperly made credibility determinations when it
 discounted Lales’s declaration that was attached to his
 opposition to JN’s motion for summary judgment. Moreover,
 Lales’s declaration was not a sham and is not clearly and
 unambiguously inconsistent with his statements made in a prior
 deposition and prior admissions.
 
-65­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Although Defendants argue that the circuit court did
 
not err in explicitly stating that it made a credibility
 
determination, it is clear that in ruling on a motion for summary
 judgment, the court must not make credibility determinations. 
Del Rosario v. Kohanuinui, 52 Haw. 583, 587 n.4, 483 P.2d 181,
 183 n.4 (1971) (“The clash of evidence on this point makes a
 precise factual determination impossible and prompts a
 consideration of . . . credibility, an improper matter for
 summary judgment resolution.”).
 
Moreover, Defendants’ argument relies on a federal
 
doctrine prohibiting “sham affidavits.” In general, the “sham
 affidavit” doctrine applies when the affidavit of a non-moving
 party in a motion for summary judgment contradicts or is
 inconsistent with his or her previous deposition testimony. See
 
10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane,
 Federal Practice & Procedure § 2726 (3d ed. 1998). Under this
 doctrine, a non-moving party generally cannot create a genuine
 issue of fact “simply by submitting an affidavit contradicting
 his [or her] own prior testimony.” Van Asdale v. Int’l Game
 
Tech., 577 F.3d 989, 998 (9th Cir. 2009).
 
The purpose of the “sham affidavit” doctrine is to
 
preserve “the utility of summary judgment as a procedure for
 screening out sham issues of fact.” Kennedy v. Allied Ins. Mut.
 
Co., 952 F.2d 262, 266 (9th Cir. 1991) (quoting Foster v. Arcata
 
-66­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Assocs., Inc., 772 F.2d 1453, 1462 (9th Cir. 1985)); see also Van
 
Asdale, 577 F.3d at 998. However, the sham affidavit doctrine
 does not prohibit the non-moving party from “elaborating upon,
 explaining, or clarifying prior testimony elicited by opposing
 counsel on deposition” in his or her affidavit. Van Asdale, 577
 
F.3d at 999 (citation omitted). Furthermore, the sham affidavit
 doctrine does not prohibit attempts by the non-moving party to
 clarify inconsistencies that result from “an honest discrepancy,
 mistake, or newly discovered evidence.” Id. (citation omitted).
 
The Ninth Circuit has held that two requirements must
 
be met before the court can strike an affidavit and grant summary
 judgment: (1) the trial court must make a factual determination
 that the contradiction was indeed a “sham” produced to avoid
 summary judgment and (2) the inconsistencies have to be clear and
 unambiguous to justify striking the affidavit. Id. at 998-99. 
If either requirement is not met, the court must consider the
 non-moving party’s affidavit in its determination to grant or
 deny summary judgment. Id. at 999.
 
This court has not explicitly adopted or rejected the
 
sham affidavit doctrine as set forth by the Ninth Circuit, and we
 need not resolve this issue here. Even assuming arguendo that
 the sham affidavit doctrine is available, it would not be
 applicable in the instant case because Lales’s declaration was
 
-67­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
not clearly and unambiguously inconsistent with his prior
 
deposition and admissions.
 
Here, Defendants argue that the circuit court properly
 
made a credibility determination regarding “numerous factual
 inconsistencies in [Lales’s] own admissions that undermine his
 claims[,]” such as: (1) the allegedly changing circumstances
 regarding Lales’s meeting with Marxen, in which Lales requested
 to be transferred from Martinez’s supervision, and (2) Lales’s
 alleged inconsistent statements regarding his consent to the use
 of the name “Frenchy.” However, these “inconsistencies” are not
 so “clearly and unambiguously inconsistent” that Lales’s
 declaration would be disregarded under the sham affidavit
 doctrine. Id. at 998-99.
 
Defendants argue that Lales’s rendition of his
 
conversation with Marxen regarding changing sales teams was
 inconsistent because he admitted that he requested a transfer
 from Martinez’s sales team because of “personality conflicts,”
 and also stated in his prior deposition that he “told [] Marxen
 that [he] was really tired of [] Martinez[’s] behavior toward
 [him], the way he treated [him], the way he would almost on a
 daily basis threaten[] [him] physically to go to the boneyard and
 retaliat[ed] against [him] on a daily basis.” However, these
 statements are not inconsistent with Lales’s subsequent
 declaration, wherein Lales stated, “I verbally complained to []
 
-68­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Marxen about the harassment and [] Martinez” and that he asked to
 
be transferred from Martinez’s team because of Martinez’s
 behavior toward him, which included derogatory remarks toward
 Lales, such as “French fries,” “French are [wimps],” “French do
 not know how to fight,” “French people stink,” and “French women
 are whores[.]” Thus, Lales’s statements regarding his
 conversation with Marxen were not inconsistent inasmuch as the
 declaration merely clarified his prior statements.
 
Defendants also contend that Lales’s declaration is
 
inconsistent with Lales’s admission that he “never submitted
 complaints to management regarding the use of the nickname
 ‘Frenchy[,]’” and a deposition in which Lales stated that he used
 the name “Frenchy” and signed this nickname on documents. Lales
 stated in his subsequent declaration that he “never consented to
 any of these discriminatory remarks made concerning [his]
 national origin/ancestry or the derogatory treatment of [him] by
 Defendant[,]” and that he felt like the name “Frenchy” was
 “offensive.” Lales’s statement in his declaration is not
 inconsistent with his prior admission and statement in his
 deposition. First, contrary to Defendants’ characterization of
 Lales’s admission, Lales only admitted that he never submitted
 “written” complaints to management regarding the use of the name,
 “Frenchy.” Second, in a deposition Lales stated that he
 “probably did” refer to himself as Frenchy, but explained that he
 
-69­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
did so out of fear of retaliation. Therefore, it is not
 
inconsistent for Lales to state in his declaration that he did
 not consent to being called “Frenchy.” Lales clearly stated in
 his admission that he did not file a written complaint, but
 stated that he orally complained, and he expressly stated a few
 times in his deposition that he used the name “Frenchy” because
 of his fear of retaliation. Lales’s declaration explained the
 prior statements that he made.
 
Accordingly, the challenged portions of the declaration
 
are not clearly and unambiguously inconsistent with Lales’s prior
 deposition statements and admissions. Thus, Lales’s declaration
 was not a “sham.”
 
3.	 The ICA did not improperly rely on inadmissible
evidence
 
Defendants contend that the ICA improperly relied on
 
“speculation and conclusory statements by Lales” and also
 
evidence that was “conflicting and inadmissible.” Defendants
 appear to assert that the ICA improperly relied on the following
 exhibits and statements that were attached to Lales’s opposition
 to JN’s motion for summary judgment: (1) an EEOC interview and
 statements, which were not authenticated or sworn to; (2) an EEOC
 Determination letter, which Defendants assert was hearsay; (3) a
 complaint of another employee against JN, which Defendants also
 assert was hearsay; (4) copies of newspaper and blog articles;
 and (5) Lales’s statement in his declaration that other employees
 
-70­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
lied to the customers about the air conditioning and were not
 
fired. Also, Defendants contend that Lales made many
 inadmissible, conclusory statements in his declaration that were
 not based on personal knowledge, such as: (1) claiming that he
 was hired by Carlton Hill; (2) asserting that he was transferred
 by Paul Tucker; and (3) using the legal terms “discriminated” and
 “retaliation.” As discussed below, the ICA did not rely on
 inadmissible evidence in its determination.
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e) 
(2000), provides, in relevant part:
 
Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made
on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as
would be admissible in evidence, and shall show
affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify
to the matters stated therein.  Sworn or certified
 
copies of all papers or parts thereof referred to in
an affidavit shall be attached thereto or served
 therewith.  The court may permit affidavits to be
supplemented or opposed by depositions, answers to
interrogatories, or further affidavits.  When a motion
 for summary judgment is made and supported as provided
in th
is rule, an adverse party may not rest upon the
mere allegations or denials of the adverse party’s
pleading, but the adverse party’s response, by
affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must
set forth specific facts showing that there is a
genuine issue for trial.  If the adverse party does
not so respond, summary judgment, if appropriate,
shall be entered against the adverse party.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Here, the ICA did not rely on the EEOC interview and
 
statements, EEOC Determination letter, complaint of a fellow
 
employee, or newspaper and blog articles in concluding that 
Defendants were not entitled to summary judgment, and the ICA did
 not mention these exhibits in its memorandum opinion. See Lales
,
 
-71­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2012 WL 1624013, at **1-18. The ICA relied only on Lales’s
 
declarations to determine that there were “genuine issues of
 material fact regarding Lales’s claims against JN for harassment
 based on ancestry and national origin discrimination.” Id. at
 
*16.
 
As to the retaliation claims, the ICA relied on Lales’s
 
statement that he complained to Marxen about the harassment, and
 that Lales was subsequently terminated within one month of
 reporting the alleged discriminatory conduct. Id. at *17. 
Although the ICA did not specifically state what it relied on to
 conclude that there was an issue of material fact as to whether
 JN’s proffered reasons for Lales’s termination were pretextual,
 Lales stated in his declaration that he denied telling the
 customers that the truck had air conditioning. All these
 statements by Lales would be admissible because they are from his
 “personal knowledge.” See HRCP Rule 56(e). In addition, the
 
allegedly improper evidence was not necessary to the ICA’s
 outcome. Accordingly, Defendants’ arguments regarding this
 evidence are misplaced.
 
With regard to Defendants’ argument that Lales’s
 
Declaration contained inadmissible conclusory statements, those
 alleged conclusory statements are irrelevant because the ICA did
 not rely on them in making its determination to vacate summary
 judgment. In regard to the claim that Lales used the legal terms
 
-72­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
“discriminated” and “retaliation” throughout his declaration,
 
again, there is no indication that the ICA relied on Lales’s use
 of these terms in making its determination.
 
Thus, the ICA did not rely on inadmissible evidence to
 
conclude that the circuit court erred in granting summary
 judgment.
 
E.	 The circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in
favor of JN on COA 4
 
Defendants assert that the ICA erred in vacating
 
summary judgment in favor of JN on COA 4 because the remedies
 
available to Lales in COA 4 were covered by remedies in HRS
 chapter 378, and accordingly, the circuit court did not err in
 granting summary judgment in favor of JN on COA 4. As discussed
 below, Defendants’ assertion has merit if the public policy claim
 was derived from the provisions of HRS chapter 378. However,
 inasmuch as the parties did not address the basis for Lales’s
 public policy claim in relation to JN’s motion for summary
 judgment, the basis for COA 4 is unclear, and thus, the ICA did
 not err in vacating summary judgment.
 
Although JN challenged all of Lales’s claims in its
 
motion for summary judgment, it did not provide any argument
 regarding why the circuit court should have granted summary
 judgment on COA 4 in its memorandum in support of his motion. At
 the hearing on JN’s motion for summary judgment and after being
 asked by Lales’s counsel if the circuit court also ruled on the
 
-73­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
public policy count, the circuit court stated, “I am granting
 
Summary Judgment on all counts. The public policy count
 runs . . . together with the reasoning that I have previously
 cited.” The circuit court did not address the public policy
 issue in its findings of fact and conclusions of law.
 
In Ralston, this court described the burden in motions
 
for summary judgment,
 
First, the moving party has the burden of
producing support for its claim that: (1) no genuine
issue of material fact exists with respect to the
essential elements of the claim or defense which the
 motion seeks to establish or which the motion
 questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. 
Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non­moving party to respond to the motion for summary
judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to
general allegations, that present a genuine issue
worthy of trial .
 
129 Hawai' i at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 1286-87 (emphasis added). 
In the instant case, JN never provided support for its
 
motion for summary judgment on the public policy claim. As such,
 
Lales was not required to present evidence sufficient to raise an
 issue of material fact as to whether JN’s termination of Lales
 violated public policy. Id. Moreover, Lales was not given an
 
opportunity to respond to any arguments regarding the public
 policy claim. See Edwards v. Honeywell, Inc., 960 F.2d 673, 674
 
(7th Cir. 1992) (noting that the trial court “erred by granting
 summary judgment on grounds to which [the non-moving party] was
 given either an inadequate opportunity or no opportunity to
 respond”). Thus, the ICA did not err in vacating the circuit
 
-74­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of JN on the public
 
policy claim.
 
In their application, Defendants contend that Lales’s
 
public policy claim is “based on the same factual basis as the
 counts based in HRS chapter 378.” Defendants cite to the first
 amended complaint and argue that Lales did not allege “any new
 facts or any new elements in his Amended Complaint relating to
 [COA] 4.” In his first amended complaint, Lales
 “reincorporate[d] and reallege[d] paragraphs 1 through 27” and
 asserted that his termination “was in violation of public policy
 for which [Defendants] are liable.” Although it may appear that
 the public policy claim would be based on the same facts as the
 HRS chapter 378 claims, the record is unclear as to the scope of
 the public policy claim.
 
As Defendants and ICA note, however, should the circuit 
court determine on remand that the public policy claim is indeed derived from HRS chapter 378, such a claim would be barred. In Takaki v. Allied Machinery Corporation, the ICA stated, “If . . . the statutory or regulatory provisions which evidence the public policy themselves provide a remedy for the wrongful discharge, provision of a further remedy under the public policy exception is unnecessary.” 87 Hawai' i 57, 63, 951 P.2d 507, 513 (App. 
1998); see also Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co., 76 Hawai' i 454, 464, 
879 P.2d 1037, 1047 (1994) (noting that a claim for wrongful 
-75­       *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
termination in violation of public policy cannot be asserted
 
“where the policy sought to be vindicated is already embodied in
 a statute providing its own remedy for its violation”).
 
Therefore, the ICA did not err in vacating the circuit
 
court’s granting of summary judgment in favor of JN on the public
 policy claim.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
In sum, summary judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1
 
and 2 was appropriate in this case. However, summary judgment in
 favor of JN on COAs 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6, was inappropriate. 
Therefore, we affirm in part and vacate in part the ICA’s
 judgment and remand to the circuit court for further proceedings.
 Christopher J. Muzzi
for petitioner
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
Daphne E. Barbee
for respondent /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ R. Mark Browning
 
-76­