***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
SAMANTHA THERESALYN MEDEIROS,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellant , 
 
vs. 
 
BRADLEY KONG CHOY,  
Petitioner/ Defendant- Appellee . 
 
 
SCWC-13-0003500 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-13-0003500; CIV. NO. 11- 1-2004-09) 
 
APRIL 26, 2018 
 
McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ., WITH N AKAYAMA, J., 
DISSENTING,  WITH WHOM RECKTENWALD, C.J., JOINS 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J.  
 
  In t his case, which  arises out of a 2007 car 
collision, the circuit court refused the plaintiff’s request to 
instruct the jury that the plaintiff’s  motives in pursuing the 
suit were immaterial to the merits of the negligence claim.  In Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-13-0003500
26-APR-2018
08:08 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 2 closing argument, the defendant argued at length that the 
plaintiff had lied about being  involved in the collision in 
order to commit worker’s compensation fraud and s ecure an 
unwarranted payout.  T he jury found by special verdict that the 
defendant was not the legal cause of the plaintiff’s  injuries. 
  On appeal, the I ntermediate C ourt of Appeals (ICA) 
vacated the circuit court judgment , holding that the requested 
jury instruction should have been given under this court’s  prior 
precedent.  We granted certiorari and further clarify the 
circumstances when a court is required to instruct the jury that 
it may not consider a plaintiff’s motiv ation for pursuing a 
civil action.  
  In applying these principles to this case, we hold 
that the plaintiff ’s motives for bringing suit w ere irrelevant 
to both the merits of her  claim and her credibility as a 
witness.  We further hold that, in light of the evidence adduced 
at trial, the jury should have been instructed as the plaintiff 
requested.  Accordingly, we affirm the ICA decision and remand 
the case for a new trial to be conducted in a manner consistent 
with this opinion. 
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
A. Events Giving  Rise to the Case 
  On J anuary 2 3, 2007, Bradley Choy rear -ended a vehicle 
driven by Bernard Jimenez while driving in heavy traffic near ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 3 downtown Honolulu.  The force of the collision pushed Jimenez’s 
vehicle forward, causing it to impact the rear of  a third 
vehicle driven by Jennilind Aggasid . 
  Samantha 
Medeiros  testified that she was  helping 
Aggasid transport a patient named Mary Beth Chan to a doctor’s 
appointment at the time of the collision.1  Aggasid operated a 
care home out of her residence, and Medeiros, who worked as a 
nursing assistant for Nursefinders ,2 had been assigned to help 
Aggasid care for Chan.  Medeiros stated that she was sitt ing 
directly behind Aggasid in the backseat when the accident took 
place.  Medeiros related that when the impact occurred, she was 
turned to the right in order to speak with  Chan, who was seated 
in the backseat on the passenger side. 
  Following the 
collision , all three cars pulled into a 
nearby gas station.   Medeiros testified that she then got out of 
the car and moved to the front seat to comfort Aggasid, who was 
badly disturbed by the event .  Medeiros state d that, except for  
briefly examining the damage to the back of the car, she 
remained in the vehicle while waiting for the police to 
arrive 
and complete their accident report. 
                                                           
 1 Aggasid gave testimony at trial generally supporting Medeiros’s 
version of events. 
 2 Nursefinders is a staffing agency that places medical aides in 
the homes of its clients.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 4   In contrast, Choy  testified that the frontmost car in 
the collision contained two women in the front seat--one elderly 
and one in her teens or twenties-- and a small child in the 
backseat.3  Choy was unable to identify Medeiros as one of the 
women present in the vehicle.  He related that the  child, whom 
he described as around four years old and in diapers , was 
visible walking back and forth on the backseat of the frontmost  
car after the vehicles pulled into the gas station.   He further 
contended that the two women attempted to conceal that the child 
had not been properly restrained by retrieving a car seat from 
the vehicle’s trunk and buckling the child into it before police 
arrived.  Medeiros and Aggasid denied that any child or car seat 
was present in the vehicle
. 
 
 The police report on the accident specifies  Aggasid as 
the driver of the front vehicle and states  that the car 
contained three occupants.  It does not provide names or 
descriptions of the other passengers.  At trial, the  police 
officer who responded to the accident, Officer Kirk Brown, gave 
a description of the occupants of Aggasid’s vehicle.  The 
officer testified that there were two women in the front seat, 
                                                           
 3 Jimenez and Choy’s wife, who was present in Choy’s vehicle during 
the accident, gave testimony at trial generally supporting Choy’s version of 
events.  At the time of the accident, Aggasid was 45 and Medeiros was 25.  
The record does not reflect Chan’s age.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 5 which he estimated to both be in their forties or older, and a 
juvenile or small adult in the backseat.  He stated that one of 
the women may have been five or ten years younger than the 
other, but acknowledged his assessment of the occupants’ age may 
not have be en accurate, noting that he was “not an expert at 
that.”  Officer Brown also testified that he did not  observe a 
car seat or a child in diapers in any of the vehicles. 
  Medeiros testified  that she began to experience pain 
in her lower back after the impact .  The pain worsened over 
time, eventually leading to months of physical therapy and two 
surgeries.  Medeiros was unable to work from January 24, 2007, 
to August 22, 2010.  Because her injuries were determined to 
have arisen out of the course and scope of her employment, 
Medeiros was deemed eligible for worker’s compensation.   Upon 
reviewing her injuries, an independent examiner rated Medeiros 
at 25% impairment of the whole person.  As a result, Medeiros 
received $153,949.75 in  medical bill reimbursements and 
$105,356.62 in temporary and permanent disability benefits. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings  
  On September 7, 2011, Medeiros filed a complaint 
against Choy in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court), alleging that Choy’s negligence was the legal cause of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 6 her injuries and seeking general, special, and punitive damages.4  
Prior to trial, Choy stipulated that he had caused the accident 
and stated that only the “cause, nature and extent of any 
injuries” suffered by Medeiros were left to be determined.  
 
  
Based on the content of pretrial depositions, Medeiros 
filed a motion in limine seeking to preclude witnesses from 
testifying regarding the presence of an unrestrained child in 
Aggasid’s vehicle or the retrieval and installation of a car 
seat from the vehicle’s trunk following the accident.  Medeiros 
argued that the child’ s presence did not bear  on any contested 
issues and was likely to waste time and confuse the jury.  She 
further asserted that it would cause her unfair prejudice 
because the jury was likely to have a strong,  negative reaction 
to allegations that a child was put in danger by a violation of 
child safety laws.  Choy responded that the testimony would 
reflect on whether Medeiros was actually involved in the 
accident, her location and position in the car when the accident 
occurred, and whether Medeiros was in the course and scope of 
her employment at the time of the accident and thus legitimately 
entitled to the worker’s compensation benefits she received.  
The circuit court denied the motion, noting that it would 
                                                           
 4 The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 7 evaluate relevance at trial in light of its understanding that 
“credibility is at i ssue always.”  
  
At trial, Medeiros first elicited testimony regarding 
the presence of a child or car seat in Aggasid’s  vehicle on 
direct examination of Aggasid , who denied that either was 
present.  Both parties questioned witnesses about the child and 
car seat throughout the rest of the trial without drawing any 
relevancy-based objections
.  Choy’s wife testified that she had 
wanted to inform the police that the child was not restrained 
during the accident so that the occupants of the car “would be 
aware that they always need to put the child in the child 
restraint seat for the safety of the child.”   Choy testified 
that he stopped his wife from relaying the information to law 
enforcement because he believed the occupants had “learned a 
lesson.”5 
  
Medeiros also submitted a proposed jury instruction 
based on this court’s decision in Kobashigawa v. Silva , 129 
Hawaii 313, 300 P.3d 579 (2013), that would have informed the 
jury that the motives of a plaintiff in bringing a lawsuit are 
immaterial if the elements of a valid cause of action are 
                                                           
 5 During his closing argument, Choy addressed the testimony of the 
responding police officer, who had testified that he did not see a car seat 
in any of the vehicles, stating, “Well, if there was no child restraint seat 
installed, then shame on those ladies, whoever they are.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 8 otherwise established.6  Medeiros proposed that the jury be 
instructed that it “may not consider the Plaintiff’s motives in 
bringing the lawsuit.  So far as the law is concerned, if the 
Plaintiff has made out a case on the facts, it is immaterial 
what her motive was.”  
  
After the parties rested, the circuit court held an 
in-chambers hearing to settle jury instructions.  Over 
Medeiros’s objection, the court refused her  request to instruct 
the jury that her motives in bringing the lawsuit were 
immaterial, although
 the court stated that it would reconsider 
Medeiros’s request
 if Choy brought up the issue of motive during 
closing arguments.   
  Prior to closing argument , the court gave instructions 
to the jury that did not include any mention  of the 
immateriality of Medeiros’s motive s for pursuing the civil 
action.  Choy then proceeded to make repeated reference in his 
closing argument to Medeiros’s alleged ly improper motives  for 
bringing suit.  Among many other references, Choy characterized 
the collision as “[o]bviously . . . a non-event, not even a blip 
                                                           
 6 Medeiros filed a separate bench memorandum prior to trial drawing 
the court’s attention to the Kobashigawa decision.  Medeiros acknowledged 
that the deadline for filing motions in limine had passed, but she suggested 
that the importance of the matter warranted a sua sponte order disallowing 
reference to or inquiry into her motive for filing the lawsuit during the 
course of trial.  The record does not indicate that the circuit court issued 
such an order.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 9 on the radar,” but argued that Medeiros had pursued litigation 
anyway because “there was money to be made and a lawsuit to be 
found--filed because this 
was a car accident and it wasn’ t her 
fault.”
  Choy also questioned the timing of Medeiros’s filing of 
a worker’s compensation claim , arguing that it indicated she had  
fabricated the incident for monetary gain: “Did she suddenly 
remember six days after the accident that she was working when 
the accident occurred or did she make the whole thing up to 
qualify for workers compensation benefits? ”7  Choy speculated 
that the allegedly delayed claim might be explained by 
Medeiros’s discovery that “ there are monetary limits to no-fault 
insurance that you don’t have with workers ’ compensation ”--a 
statement for which no evidence was presented at trial.  Choy 
then impli
ed that Medeiros’s lawsuit was an attempt to hold him 
responsible for reimbursing the payments she received through a 
false worker’s compensation claim: “ So if Mrs. Medeiros was not 
in the vehicle or not working at the time, then she arguably 
submitted a false workers compensation claim, and if so, Mr. 
                                                           
 7 The term “work -related” first appears in Medeiros’s physician’s 
notes in an entry that corresponded with Medeiros’s second visit, which 
occurred on January 29, 2007.  The physician testified that this could 
indicate that he was not informed that the car accident was work related 
during Medeiros’s initial visit on  the day after the collision, January 24, 
2007.  However, the insurance adjuster who handled Medeiros’s claim testified 
that Medeiros reported her injury to Nursefinders “right away,” and the 
insurer prepared a WC -1 form documenting a work -related injury to Medeiros on 
January 26, 2007. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 10 Choy should not be held responsible for reimbursing that false 
claim.”  Choy also suggest ed that a verdict in Medeiros’s favor 
would be something the jury would be ashamed of because it would 
serve to consummate
 her fraudulent scheme:   
And when this case is over, each of you will be able to go 
home and talk about the case with your family and friends, 
and when you talk about the case, can you say you would be 
proud of a verdict of $1.2 million for this accident?  
Absolutely not.  The only one who would be proud of such a 
verdict is the plaintiff because she would have 
accomplished exactly what she set out to accomplish the 
moment she informed Dr. Miscovich she was in a car accident 
and then convert it to  a workers ’ compensation claim.   
  Following closing arguments, the court provided the 
general concluding jury instructions, which again did not inform  
the jury that it could not  consider Medeiros’ s motives for 
pursuing the lawsuit.   The jury returned an eleven- to-one 
special verdict finding that Choy’s negligence was not the legal 
cause of injury to Medeiros.  Medeiros renewed a previously 
filed motion for judgment as a matter of law, or, in the 
alternative, for a new trial.  T he circuit court denied the 
motion and entered judgment.   Medeiros timely appealed. 
C. ICA Proceedings  
  On appeal to  the ICA, Medeiros argued that the circuit 
court had erred by admitting irrelevant and prejudicial 
testimony about an unrestrained child and car seat in Aggasid’s 
vehicle and by refusing to give a jury instruction barring 
consideration of Medeiros’s motivat ion for bringing the lawsuit.    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 11   In a memorandum opinion, the ICA first considered the 
content of Medeiros’s proposed jury instruction.8  Referencing 
this court’s Kobashigawa  decision, the ICA held that the 
instruction was a correct statement of the law.  T he ICA further 
held that, taken in light of Choy’s repeated allegations that 
Medeiros’s lawsuit was brought as part of a scheme to commit 
worker’s compensation fraud, the circuit court’s failure to give 
the instruction was “prejudicially insufficient.”  
  The ICA then turned to the admissibility of testimony 
regarding the unrestrained child and the retrieval and 
installation of a car seat  in the backseat of Aggasid’s vehicle .  
The appellate court considered Medeiros’s contention that the 
testimony was irrelevant under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 401 (1993) and HRE Rule 402 (1993).  The ICA stated that 
the evidence of the unrestrained child and the car seat was 
being used to show alleged worker’ s compensation fraud and thus 
related to Medeiros’s motives for bringing sui t.  The court  
explained that, under Kobashigawa, evidence of Medeiros’s 
motives was inadmissible substantively or to impeach Medeiros’s 
credibility as a witness.  The ICA therefore held that the 
testimony was not relevant to disprove Medeiros and Chan’s 
                                                           
 8 The ICA’s memorandum o pinion is available at Medeiros v. Choy , 
CAAP-13-0003500, 2016 WL 3408046 (App. June 16, 2016) (mem.).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 12 presence in the car at the time of the accident in order to 
undermine Medeiros’s  worker’s compensation claim. 
  The ICA also held, however, that the testimony did 
have a tendency to prove or disprove Medeiros’s position within 
the car at the time of the accident.  This was relevant to the 
issue of causation, the ICA concluded, because expert testimony 
had indicated that the location and direction of Medeiros’s body 
affected her likelihood of injury  from the impact.  
  Notwithstanding the relevance of the evidence under 
HRE Rule 401, the ICA held that the circuit court had abused its 
discretion by admitting the testimony because, under HRE Rule 
403 (1980), its probative value was substantially outweighed by 
its potential to confuse the jury and incite unfair prejudice 
against Medeiros.  The court reasoned that the existence of a 
child and the installation of a car seat in the backseat of 
Aggasid’s vehicle had o nly a minimal bearing on Medeiros’s 
position in the vehicle at the time of the impact.  In contrast, 
the ICA stated, the testimony was very likely to confuse the 
jury and cause Medeiros unfair prejudice because Choy repeatedly 
referenced it in conjunction with Medeiros’s alleged motive of 
committing worker’s compensation fraud, which the ICA had held 
inadmissible. 
  Based on these rulings, the ICA vacated the circuit 
court’s judgment and the order denying Medeiros’s motion for ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 13 judgment as a matter of law, or, in the alternative, for a new 
trial, and the ICA remanded the case for a new trial.  
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW  
A. Jury Instructions 
  We review jury instructions to determine whether, 
considered as a whole, the instructions were “prejudicially 
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.”  Nelson 
v. Univ. of Haw. , 97 Hawai i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 (2001) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  Invalid or 
insufficient instructions are presumptively prejudicial and are 
grounds for vacating the verdict unless it affirmatively appears 
from the record as a whole that the error was harmless.  Id. 
B. Evidentiary Rulings 
  The standard we employ when reviewing the 
admissibility of evidence varies with the particular evidentiary 
rule at issue.  
State v. West , 95 Hawai i 452, 456-57, 24 P.3d 
648, 653-54 (2001) (citing Kealoha v. Cty.  of Haw., 74 Haw. 308, 
319, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993)).  When a rule is amenable to 
objective application such that it can result in only one 
correct answer in a given situation, we review lower courts’ 
application of the rule under the right/wrong standard.  Id.  
The evaluation of whether evidence is “relevant” within the 
meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) falls into this category of 
determinations, and we are thus not required to give weight to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 14 the trial court’s application of the rule.  State v. St. Clair, 
101 Hawai i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003).   
  When a n evidentiary rule calls for a “judgment call” 
by the trial court, however, the traditional abuse of discretion 
standard applies.  Id.  HRE Rule 403 (1993)--under which a trial 
court weighs the probative value of relevant evidence against 
its potential to cause unfair prejudice, confuse the issues, or 
waste time--requires such a judgment call.  State v. Richie , 88 
Hawaii 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 1245 (1998).  We will therefore 
set aside a trial court’s HRE Rule 403 determination only when 
it “exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant.”  Samson v. Nahulu, 136 Hawai i 415, 425, 363 
P.3d 263, 273 (2015) (quoting State v. Ganal , 81 Hawai i 358, 
373, 917 P.2d 370, 385 (1996)).  
III. DISCUSSION 
  In his application for a writ of certiorari, Choy 
presents two questions for our review: 1) “Whether the circuit 
court should have issued an instruction on Medeiros’  motives for 
bringing the lawsuit,” and 2) “Whether the circuit court abused 
its discretion in denying [Medeiros’s] motion in limine to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 15 exclude evidence of an unidentified child in the back seat of” 
Aggasid’s car.9  We address each issue in turn.  
A. The Requested Jury Instruction as to Irrelevancy of Motive in 
Bringing a Lawsuit Was Required.  
  We have often held that
 “it is error for a trial judge 
to refuse to give instructions requested which correctly state 
the law on issues presented unless the points are adequately 
covered by the instructions given. ”  Gibo v. City & C ty. of 
Honolulu, 51 Haw. 299, 304, 459 P.2d 198, 201 (1969); accord 
Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co. , 85 Hawai i 336, 371, 944 P.2d 1279, 
1314 (1997); State ex rel. Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp., 82 
Hawaii 32, 52, 919 P.2d 294, 314 (1996).   Thus, a court must 
give a requested jury instruction when 1) the instruction 
accurately states the law; 2) the instruction is applicable to 
an issue presented; and 3) the instruction is not needlessly 
duplicative.  Because neither party claims that the substance of 
Medeiros’s proposed jury instruction regarding motive in 
bringing a lawsuit was covered by other instructions given, we 
                                                           
 9 In presenting the second question, Choy’s application refers to 
“Plaintiff’s car” rather than Aggasid’s car.  Medeiros testified at trial 
that she had left her car at Aggasid’s house on the morning of the accident 
and that Nursefinders regulations prohibited her from using her personal 
vehicle to transport patients.  Because it appears to be uncontested that it 
was Aggasid’s car that was involved in the accident, we assume Choy’s 
reference was in error and address only the admissibility of testimony 
regarding Aggasid’s car.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 16 consider whether the instruction correctly stated the law and 
was applicable to an issue presented. 
1. The Relevancy of a Plaintiff’ s Motive for Bringing Suit 
a. Principles of Law 
  Medeiros requested that the jury be instructed it “may 
not consider the Plaintiff’s motives in bringing the lawsuit ” 
and that “as far as the law is concerned, if the Plaintiff has 
made out a case on the facts, it is immaterial what her motive 
was.” 
  I n Kobashigawa v. Silva , 129 Hawai i 313, 315-16 , 300 
P.3d 579, 581-82 (2013), the wife and daughter  of a man killed 
in a pedestrian crosswalk brought claims for negligence and 
negligent infliction of emotional distress against the City and 
County of Honolulu (City).  When deposed, the only eyewitness to 
the accident testified that she called the daughter of the 
decedent on the day following the accident , “and the first thing 
out of [the daughter’s]  mouth was, ‘ Would you be willing to 
testify if we sued?’”   Id. at 316, 300 P.3d at 582.  The 
eyewitness stated that she took offense to the question and 
“pretty much hung up, after that ” because she was angry that the 
daughter had “s[een] her father’ s death with money signs in her 
eyes.”  Id.  The deposition was admitted at trial, and in its 
closing argument, the City pointed to the witness’ s testimony in 
suggesting that the lawsuit was “simply about getting a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 17 collectable monetary award from the City. ”  Id. at 318-19, 300 
P.3d at 584-85.   
  In holding that  the City’s evidence and commentary 
were irrelevant and inadmissible, we noted that “ it is a long -
standing principle of law that a plaintiff’ s motive in filing a 
lawsuit is otherwise immaterial to resolving the merits  of the 
dispute.”  Id. at 333, 300 P.3d at 599 (emphasis added).  This 
rule is firmly established in the precedent of this court.  
See Carter v. Ah So , 12 Haw. 291, 302 (Haw. Terr. 1899) (“So far 
as the law is concerned, if the plaintiff has made out a case on 
the facts, it is immaterial what [the] motive was.”);  Lucas v. 
American–Hawaiian Eng’ g & Constr. Co. , 16 Haw. 80, 85 –86 (Haw. 
Terr. 1904) (“[T]he weight of authority is that the motives of a 
taxpayer in bringing a suit can not be inquired into if he has 
shown that he has the other qualifications to sue.  . . . That 
motives can not be inquired into is well settled .”). 
  Indeed, the precept that a plaintiff’s motives for 
bringing an action are not relevant to the merits of the suit 
was regarded as generally accepted within American jurisprudence 
as far back as the turn of the twentieth century.  In 1900, the 
United States Supreme Court observed that,  “If the law concerned 
itself with the motives of parties new complications would be 
introduced into suits which might seriously obscure their real 
merits.”  Dickerman v. N. Tr. Co. , 176 U.S. 181, 190 (1900); see ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 18 also McMullen v. Ritchie , 64 F. 253, 261 (C.C.N.D. Ohio 1894); 
Toler v. E. Tenn., V. & G. Ry. Co. , 67 F. 168, 177 (C.C.E.D. 
Tenn. 1894); Davis v. Flagg , 35 N.J. Eq. 491, 495 (1882).  The 
rule has remained well  established in courts  throughout the 
nation in the years since.  See, e.g. , Johnson v. King-
Richardson Co., 36 F.2d 675, 677 (1st Cir. 1930); Somers v. AAA 
Temp. Servs., 5 Ill. App. 3d 931, 935 (1972); Sharon v. Time,  
Inc., 599 F. Supp. 538, 586 (S.D.N.Y. 1984); Rhone-Poulenc Rorer 
Inc. v. Home Indem. Co. , No. CIV. A. 88-9752, 1991 WL 183842, at 
*2 (E.D. Pa. Sept. 16, 1991); Karim v. Gunn , 999 A.2d 888, 890 
(D.C. 2010); Tallman v. Freedman Anselmo Lindberg, L.L.C. , No. 
11-3201, 2013 WL 2631754, at *3 (C.D. Ill. June 12, 2013 ).10 
  T he rule does not bar evidence of a plaintiff’s motive 
in all situations, but rather states only that such evidence is 
immaterial to resolving the merits of the suit.  Courts have in 
limited situations admitted evidence of motive when it is used 
for some matter unrelated to disproving the 
merits of the 
underlying action.  When recently considering the matter, the 
United States District Court for the Eastern District of 
                                                           
 10 Contra Gaudin v. Shell Oil Co. , 132 F.R.D. 178, 179 (E.D. La. 
1990) (stating, without explanation, that a personal injury plaintiff’s 
credit and financial history was admissible to show that she had an improper 
motive in bringing the suit); but see Charles A. Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, 
22B Federal Practice & Procedure  § 5240 n.17 (1st ed.) (referring to Gaudin 
as a “[s]hocking ruling unless there is more to [the] case than appears from 
[the] opinion”). ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 19 Virginia discussed four situations when evidence of a 
plaintiff’s motive may bear on such collateral issue s.  See 
Samsung Elecs. Co. v. NVIDIA Corp. , No. 3:14CV757, 2016 WL 
754547, at *2 (E.D. Va. Feb. 24, 2016).  First, motive evidence 
may be admissible when a defendant raises certain equitable 
defenses such as laches or estoppel.  Id. (citing Parsons v. 
Jefferson-Pilot Corp. , 141 F.R.D. 408, 414 (M.D.N.C. 1992)) ; see 
also C.L. Maddox, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am. , 208 Ill. App. 
3d 1042, 1051, 567 N.E.2d 749, 755 (1991) (admitting evidence of 
plaintiff’s financial difficulty when arson raised as defense to 
action to collect on insurance policy).  Second, motive may in 
some instances be considered during class certification when 
determining whether a plaintiff is an appropriate class 
representative.  
Samsung, 2016 WL 754547, at *2 (citing Denny v. 
Carey, 73 F.R.D. 654, 656  (E.D. Pa. 1977)).  Third, courts may 
consider the motivation of the p laintiff in bringing suit when 
considering whether to grant various post- disposition  motions .  
See id.; Tallman, 2013 WL 2631754, at *3; Lee v. Kucker & Bruh, 
LLP, No. 12 Civ. 4662(BSJ)(JCF), 2013 WL 680929, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. 
Feb. 25, 2013). 
  Lastly, courts have in narrow circumstance s permit ted 
a plaintiff’s motive for bringing suit to be considered to 
demonstrate bias and undermine the cre dibility of a plaintiff 
who testifies--when the evidence demonstrates that the plaintiff ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 20 brought the lawsuit for an ulterior purpose.  Samsung, 2016 WL 
754547, at *2.  In Montoya v. Village  of Cuba , No. CIV 11-0814 
JB/SMV, 2013 WL 6504291, at *17 (D.N.M. Nov. 30, 2013), for 
instance, the court permitted inquiry into a plaintiff’s motive 
for pursuing a wrongful arrest claim when it was alleged that 
the suit was brought in retaliation for the officer- defendant’s 
perceived role in a hospital’s decision to discontinue the 
plaintiff’s morphine prescription.  Allegations that the suit 
was brought for the purpose of harassing the defendant were 
relevant to the plaintiff’s credibility becau se it suggested 
bias in her testimony other than the bias inherent in the 
adversarial process.  See also Barkley v. City of Klamath Falls , 
302 F. App’x  705, 706 (9th Cir. 2008); Heath v. Cast, 813 F.2d 
254, 259 (9th Cir. 1987);  Montoya v. Sheldon , 898 F.  Supp. 2d 
1259, 1278 (D.N.M. 2012).  
  In contrast, evidence that a plaintiff is seeking the 
relief that is at stake in the case has no additional bearing on 
the plaintiff’s credibility as a witness  beyond what is inhere nt 
in the very existence of the lawsuit.  We thus held in 
Kobashigawa that testimony that the plaintiffs brought the suit 
for the purpose of monetary gain was not relevant  to the 
plaintiffs’ credibility.  129 Hawai i at 333-34, 300 P.3d at 599-
600.  The testimony had no probative value because the 
plaintiffs’ very filing of a complaint established that they  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 21 sought monetary reparations  for the alleged wrong done to them 
by the defendant.  See id. 
  In sum , evidence of a plaintiff’s motive in bringing a 
civil action is not material to the substantive elements of the 
cause of action giving rise to the suit in which it is offered.  
Such evidence may, however,
 be admissible for impeaching a 
plaintiff-witness when it tends to prove that the true purpose 
of the suit is something other than vindicating the alleged 
injury through the remedy sought.11  
This rule coincides with 
longstanding practices of courts across the nation. 
b. The Dissent’s Proposed Rule  
 
 The dissent argues that evidence of a plaintiff’s 
motive for bringing suit may be  relevant to impeach a 
plaintiff’s credibility as a witness whe n “there is evidence to 
support” that the plaintiff might have filed suit fraudulently 
or in bad faith.  Dissent at 3.  The dissent distinguishes the 
“bad faith” in its proffered rule from the bad faith we have 
identified, appearing to argue that allegations of dishonesty 
regarding aspects of a claim make evidence or consideration 
of a 
                                                           
 11 Even when evidence of a plain tiff’s motive is relevant to a 
witness’s credibility in the limited situations discussed, its admission must 
be in compliance with other evidentiary rules, including a determination 
under HRE Rule 403 that the probative value of the evidence is not 
substantially outweighed by its potential to confuse the issues and cause 
undue prejudice.  See  Sheldon, 898 F. Supp. 2d at 1278 (limiting cross -
examination regarding plaintiff’s alleged retaliatory motives for bringing 
suit in order to avoid introducing undue prejudice into the proceeding).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 22 plaintiff’s motive for bringing the lawsuit  relevant to the 
plaintiff’s credibility as a witness because money damages 
create a financial incentive to be untruthful.12  Dissent at 8 , 8 
n.1.  Respectfully, the dissent’s approach is contrary to 
settled law in this jurisdiction, problematic in application, 
and unworkable in practice.   
  Plainly , the range of cases in which the defendant 
could argue that there is evidence of bad faith or questions of 
fraud with respect to the elements of a claim is virtually 
limitless (e.g., whether an injury occurred,13 whether the injury 
was preexisting or occurred after the incident at issue,14 
whether the defendant ’s conduct was a  cause of the injury,15 
                                                           
 12 While the dissent contends that its position is otherwise, the 
basis of the dissent’s argument is that a plaintiff’s motive --which here is  
obtaining financial relief--is relevant to the plaintiff’s credibility as a 
witness when other evidence indicates that the suit may have been brought 
fraudulently or in bad faith .  A witness’s motive affects his or her 
credibility only insofar as it provides an incentive to testify in a biased 
or untruthful manner.  Thus, the dissent essentially argues that financial 
relief provides an incentive for the plaintiff to testify in a biased or 
untruthful manner regarding the merits of the suit and, by necessary 
implication, that evidence of such a motive makes it more likely that the 
suit was b rought fraudulently or in bad faith . 
 13 E.g., Royal State Nat ’l Ins. Co. v. Labor & Indus. Relations 
Appeal Bd., 53 Haw. 32, 36, 487 P.2d 278, 281 (1971); Essenburg v. Cabane , 
196 F. Supp. 83, 88 (D. Haw. 1961).  
 14 E.g., Montalvo v. Lapez , 77 Hawai i 282, 292, 884 P.2d 345, 355 
(1994); Weite v. Momohara , 124 Hawai i 236, 243, 240 P.3d 899, 906 (App. 
2010). 
 15 E.g., O’Grady v. State , 140 Hawai i 36, 48, 398 P.3d 625, 637 
(2017); Taylor- Rice v. State , 91 Hawai i 60, 74, 979 P.2d 1086, 1100 (1999); 
Aga v. Hundahl , 78 Hawai i 230, 237, 891 P.2d 1022, 1029 (1995).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 23 whether the injury resulted from use of a product,16 etc.).  The 
dissent responds that such an argument “will only arise in 
exceptional circumstances. ”  Dissent at 16.  Yet the bar is not 
set overly high.  Here, the responding officer, who offered the 
only account of the incident from a neutral party not involved 
in the collision, confirmed Aggasid and Medeiros’s testimony 
that a child and car seat were not present and thus undermined a 
core basis of Choy’s fraud allegations.17  Nonetheless, the 
                                                           
 16 E.g., Udac v. Takata Corp. , 121 Hawai i 143, 156, 214 P.3d 1133, 
1146 (App. 2009).  Indeed, an argument that a plaintiff’s claim is fabricated 
is one of the only substantive defenses available in a range of relatively 
commonplace strict liability causes of action, including when an injury is 
asserted from an alleged manufacturing defect.  See Johnson v. Raybestos -
Manhattan, Inc. , 69 Haw. 287, 288, 740 P.2d 548, 549 (1987) (“By definition, 
a strict products liability action does not require a showing that the 
defendant was negligent in manufacturing or distributing the product.”).  
 17 Officer Brown’s testimony was consistent with Medeiros and 
Aggasid’s also in that he testified to witnessing one individual in the back 
seat of Aggasid’s vehicle and two women in the front seat.  Medeiros 
testified that she got out of the car following the accident and moved to the 
front seat to comfort Aggasid, who was disturbed by the event.  Medeiros’s 
testimony therefore indicated the two women were sitting in the front seat  
and Chan was sitting in the backseat when the officer arrived.  Also 
consistent with Medeiros and Aggasid ’s testimony was Officer Brown’s  
description of the person in  the back seat “who was a little bit smaller than 
the normal.”  Chan was “around 5 feet something ,” suffered from mental health 
issues, and would commonly look down.  The dissent argues that an indication 
of the fraudulent nature of the lawsuit is that Officer Brown characterized 
the two women as both being over forty and stated that he did not recognize 
anyone in the cou rtroom at trial.   Dissent at 12.  Officer Brown testified 
that he was “not an expert” at judging age and acknowledged that his estimate 
may have been off.  He also testified only that he could not recall whether 
Medeiros was one of the car occupants but did not deny that she could have 
been in the vehicle.  Officer Brown further testified that he had 
investigated about a thousand traffic accidents in his career as a beat 
officer and pointed out that the trial in this case occurred  more than six 
years after the accident .  Medeiros’s appearance had changed enough over this 
time period that defense counsel introduced a number of old photographs into 
evidence to demonstrate to the jury what Medeiros looked like at the time of 
the collision.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 24 dissent makes clear that the testimony of the defendant and his 
wife, supported by another driver in the collision,  is 
sufficient to trigger the dissent’s rule  and somehow make 
Medeiros’s motive of seeking financial relief in a lawsuit 
relevant to her credibility.   As this balance of evidence is 
sufficient to trigger the dissent’s rule, the approach applies 
in circumstances that are far from “exceptional” within our 
legal system.   
  Further,
 evidence that a plaintiff seeks financial 
relief in the filing of a lawsuit  does not make it more or less 
likely that the plaintiff is testifying untruthfully, as the 
dissent appears to 
contend, nor that the suit was brought 
fraudulently or in bad faith.  Such evidence therefore fails 
threshold relevancy requirement s.  See HRE Rule 401.  As 
discussed, evidence that shows only that the plaintiff is 
seeking the relief requested based on the reasons set forth in 
the claim has little to no actual bearing on a plaintiff’s 
credibility beyond what is inherent in the very existence of the 
lawsuit and accordingly serves only to appeal to the prejudices 
of the finder of fact.  Conversely, when there is evidence that 
a plaintiff is pursuing a case for an ulterior motive unrelated 
to vindicating the alleged injury through the remedy sought, the 
evidence is relevant to
 demonstrate a plaintiff’s bias as a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 25 witness regardless of whether there is also evidence of fraud in 
the underlying lawsuit.  See HRE Rule 609.1 (1980). 
  The dissent’s position is therefore inconsistent with 
our holding in Kobashigawa v. Silva , which explicitly rejects 
any direct equivalence between “motive evidence permissible 
under [HRE] Rule 609.1 to impeach the credibility of a witness ” 
and “evidence of the plaintiff ’s [financial] motive for filing 
suit.”18  129 Hawaii 313, 334, 300 P.3d 579, 600 (2013).   
Kobashigawa  is clear that evidence of a financial motive for 
filing a lawsuit “ is irrelevant and thus inadmissible ,” and that 
HRE Rule 609.1 may not be used as an end- run-around “ to question 
the bias, interest, or motive of the plaintiff bringing the 
suit.”19  Id.  Assertions of bad faith or dishonesty may bear on 
                                                           
 18 The dissent appears to conflate different evidentiary concepts, 
including the admissibility of evidence of present or past instances of bad 
faith or fraud--which is admissible for the purposes identified in HRE Rule 
404 and HRE Rule 608 or to disprove the elements of the claim--with  evidence 
admissible for the purpose of showing the plaintiff’s financial motive for 
bringing the lawsuit .  The principles are distinct.  Evidence of past or 
current fraudulent conduct  may bear on the merits of the claim and a 
testifying plaintiff’s credibility.  Thus, the dissent’s conclusio n that 
“evidence indicating that Medeiros may have filed suit against Choy in bad 
faith and for purposes of perpetuating fraud was relevant to her credibility 
as a witness” is nearly correct --evidence of fraud is generally relevant.  
Dissent at 24.  But as stated, evidence of a plaintiff’s motive in the filing 
of a lawsuit--obtaining financial relief--does not make it more or less 
likely that the plaintiff is testifying untruthfully or that the  relief is 
sought fraudulently or in bad faith.   Such evidence is not relevant , and 
otherwise admissible evidence thus may not be considered for this purpose.  
See HRE Rule 401.   
 19 The dissent interprets this principle as suggesting “that 
Kobashigawa completely precludes evidence of a plaintiff’s motive from being 
used to impeach his or her credibility as a witness in all circumstances.”  
Dissent at 16.  To the contrary, Kobashigawa  correctly applied our 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 26 the merits of the claim and a plaintiff’s credibility, but the 
unproven assertions may not be used to attack the plaintiff for 
seeking financial relief because a financial motivation for 
bringing suit does not bear on those issues.  Indeed, leveraging 
allegations of a monetary motive
 in order to appeal to a jury’s 
prejudices amounts to an attack on a foundation  of our civil 
justice system--that injured plaintiffs may be properly made 
whole through monetary relief. 
  The dissent relies on several inapposite and 
insubstantial cases from other jurisdictions to argue that its 
approach has been recognized by “numerous other courts.”  
Dissent at 9-10, 17.  
A review of the cited cases demonstrates 
that the defense’s proposed rule has little support in the 
precedents of other jurisdictions.   
  In 
Valdez v. State ex rel. Farrior , 142 Fla. 123, 137, 
194 So. 388, 394 (1940),  for instance, the court stated in dicta 
that equitable relief mig ht be unavailable where a plaintiff’s 
hands are rendered “unclean” by the improper purpose of the 
lawsuit.  The court did not suggest that the plaintiff’s motive 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
evidentiary rules to prohibit impeachment with evidence that the plaintiff is 
seeking monetary relief in the case, which is not relevant to a plaintiff’s 
credibility.  As stated, evidence that the plaintiff possesses an ulterior 
motive for filing the suit is relevant to a plaintiff’s credibility and, 
absent some other evidentiary bar, wholly admissible for impeachment  
purposes. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 27 for bringing suit could be relevant to the plaintiff’s 
credibility, but rather that it could be relevant to an 
equitable defense--one of the purposes that our analysis 
specifically identified as permissible.  Similarly, the dissent 
quotes a passing reference in dicta in the unpublished opinion 
of Caldwell v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. , No. 99-2272, 2000 WL 
1335564, at 5* (10th Cir. Sept. 15, 2000), in which the court 
stated that the plaintiff’s financial motivation for filing suit 
was irrelevant “[a] bsent some evidence of fraud .”  The sole case 
the Caldwell  court cited for this proposition concerned evidence 
of the plaintiff’s financial motive to commit arson --a potential 
defense in his action against his insurance company that was 
very similar to the clean hands defense considered in Valdez, 
which again is consistent with the exception recognized in our 
analysis.  See C.L. Maddox, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of Am. , 567 
N.E.2d 749, 755 (Ill. App. 1991).20 
  The dissent also cites Yates v. Sweet Potato 
Enterprises, Inc. , Case No: C 11-01950 SBA, 2013 WL 4067783, at 
                                                           
 20 It is also noted that , in reaching its holding,  the Caldwell  
court considered the Gaudin v. Shell Oil Co.  decision discussed supra note 
10.  2000 WL 1335564, at *5 n.4 (citing 132 F.R.D. 178, 179 (E.D.  La. 1990)).  
The Caldwell court specifically disclaimed Gaudin’s admission of evidence 
intended to show that the plaintiff “had an improper [financial] motive in 
bringing the suit,” describing the holding as “remarkable, to say the least .”  
Id. (emphasis added).  Thus, even some of the cases on which the dissent 
relies reject an approach that equates evidence of a plaintiff’s motivation 
for bringing suit with evidence that the suit is fraudulent . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 28 *2 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 1, 2013), an unpublished trial order on 
motions in limine, 
which explicitly addressed only evidence of  
the plaintiff’s “prior  litigation activities ”--not the 
plaintiff’s motivation for bringing the case in which the 
evidence was offered.  Further, in ruling that th e evidence was 
admissible, the Yates  court stated, “A claim for money damages 
does create a financial incentive to be untruthful, and it was 
not improper for opposing counsel to invoke this incentive in an 
attempt to impeach plaintiff. ”  Id. at *4 (quoting Marcic v. 
Reinauer Transp. Cos. , 397 F.3d 120, 125 (2d Cir. 2005)).  This 
statement is plainly at odds with our holding in Kobashigawa  
prohibiting impeachment of a plaintiff- witness with evidence of 
a financial motivation for bringing suit.  129 Hawaii at 334, 
300 P.3d at 600 .  Further, its overbreadth is apparent on its 
face; if evidence of a plaintiff’s motive for bringing suit is 
admissible for impeachment purposes  whenever a plaintiff seeks 
monetary damages, admittance of evidence of motive would be the 
rule in nearly all civil cases rather than the exception.  
Another unpublished order cited by the dissent, Beyar v. City of  
New York , No. 04 -CV-3765 (JFB)(KAM), 2007 WL 1959010 (E.D.N.Y. 
June 29, 2007), denied a post -trial motion for new trial or to 
set aside the verdict, relying on the same passage ci ted in 
Yates that we rejected in Kobashigawa .  Id. at *4.  T he Beyar 
court also hedged its conclusions, stating that the jury ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 29 instructions cured the potential prejudice “even if defense 
counsel’s remarks were improper.”   Id. 
  In all , it is clear the dissent’s rule has not been 
adopted in numerous jurisdictions.  At most, i t finds some scant 
support in two unpublished orders that rely on an interpretation 
of relevance that this court squarely rejected in Kobashigawa .   
  A side from the  doctrinal shortcomings in the dissent ’s 
approach, it also raises a host of intractable procedural 
problems.  The dissent’s criterion to admit evidence of a 
plaintiff’s financial motive  appears to be virtually bottomless: 
“when there is evidence to support” that the lawsuit may have 
been filed in bad faith or with fraudulent intentions.  Dissent 
at 3, 8.  Thus, it appears that any evidence to support such an 
inference would be sufficient.  In this case,  the evidence at 
trial raised questions as to (1) whether Medeiros was present at 
the accident scene,  (2) where she was sitting at the time of the 
collision, (3) whether she was facing sideways during the 
impact, and (4) whether she sustained the injuries claimed.  The 
number of similar issues in personal injury cases i n which there 
may be evidence triggering the dissent’s rule would render the 
test for admissibility virtually meaningless.21   
                                                           
 21 See supra notes 13- 16. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 30   Assuming that the “evidence to support” standard does 
not essentially make the evidence of bringing a lawsuit to seek 
financial relief automatically admissible, the dissent offers no 
specifics as to how the admissibility determination is made,  
such as: what evidence should be considered by the court in 
making its determination; what burden of proof applies to show 
that the suit was filed fraudulently or in bad faith;  and at 
what stage of the litigation the as sessment should  take place.  
If the evaluation amounts to a preliminary determination under 
HRE Rule 104 (1984),22 the dissent’s rule would seemingly require 
a judge to conduct a miniature trial prior to the actual trial 
under the semblance of an HRE Rule 104 proceeding , hearing the 
same witnesses and considering the same evidence that would be 
presented at trial in order to make a preliminary ruling as to 
whether there is sufficient evidence ( on seemingly ultimate 
issues in the case) to admit evidence of financial motive to 
bring the suit.23  This procedural mire would all be for the 
                                                           
 22 HRE Rule 104 primarily addresses the “determination of  . . . a 
preliminary fact,” whereas the evaluation called for by the dissent as to the 
presence of fraud would appear to be at best a mixed question of fact and 
law.  It is far from clear that such a determination would fall within the 
scope of HRE Rule 104, and if not some other means unspecified by the dissent 
would need to be employed.  
 23 Here, the preliminary assessment would require the trial judge to 
consider, at minimum,  the testimony of Medeiros, Aggasid, Choy, Choy’s wife, 
and Officer Brown.  An accurate determination would likely also require the 
judge to hear from Medeiros’s doctor and other personnel who handled 
Medeiros’s worker’s compensation claim to determine whether Medeiros’s 
injuries reasonably could have arisen from the collision.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 31 purpose of determining the admissibility of evidence without  any 
probative value.24   
  Moreover, t he “basic precondition for admissibility of 
all evidence,” is that it is “‘ relevant ’ as that term is defined 
in [HRE] Rule 401 .”  Commentary to HRE Rule 402 (1980) (emphasis 
added).  As stated, seeking financial relief in a lawsuit does 
not make it more or less likely that 
a plaintiff is testifying 
untruthfully or that the relief is sought in bad faith or for 
the purpose of committing fraud, and therefore such evidence is 
not relevant under HRE Rule 401.  The dissent does not dispute 
this basic principle, yet repeatedly asserts that “evidence of a 
plaintiff’s motive  in filing suit may be relevant to the 
plaintiff’s credibility in narrow circumstances where there is 
evidence to support that the plaintiff dishonestly sought relief 
that he or she knew that he or she was not entitled to, at the 
expense of another .”  Dissent at 13.  But because evidence of a 
plaintiff’s motive in seeking financial relief in a lawsuit is 
not a fact of consequence to t he plaintiff’s credibility (i.e., 
it does not make it more or less likely that the plaintiff is 
testifying truthfully or that the lawsuit is brought in bad 
                                                           
 24 Procedural questions also arise regarding the effect that the 
evidence would be given once it is admitted, such as  whether jurors would be 
required to disregard the plaintiff’s motive  for bringing the lawsuit  in 
determining the elements of the plaintiff’s claim if they find that the suit 
had not been brought fraudulently or in bad faith . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 32 faith), the dissent essentially applies a definition of 
“relevant” other than the one prescribed in HRE Rule 401.  
However, it is the HRE that govern proceedings in the courts of 
this state, subject only to exceptions not applicable here.  HRE 
Rules 101, 1101(a), (b) (1980).  And these Rules do not permit 
the admission of evidence
 that does not satisfy HRE Rule 401, 
nor do the Rules countenance a court-created exception for 
“extraordinary
 cases,” regardless of the breadth of the 
exception advocated.   
  Thus, the dissent’s approach is legally flawed and has 
no basis in our well-established precedent.  The cumbersome 
obstacles and potential for unwarranted prejudice it would 
introduce confirms what the U.S. Supreme Court observed over a 
century ago: “If the law concerned itself with the motives of 
parties new complications would be introduced into suits which 
might seriously obscure their real merits.”  Dickerman v. N. Tr. 
Co., 176 U.S. 181, 190 (1900).  
2.  The Accuracy and Applicability of Medeiros’s Requested  
Instruction to Issues in the Case 
  Medeiros proposed that the jury be instructed that it 
“may not consider the Plaintiff’s motives in bringing the 
lawsuit.  So far as the law is concerned, if the Plaintiff has 
made out a case on the facts, it is immaterial what her motive 
was.”  This is a correct statement of the law as it applied to ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 33 this case.  Choy offered no evidence indicating that Medeiros 
had any motivation for bringing the action other than obtaining 
the monetary relief she sought.  The jury therefore should not 
have been permitted to consider in its deliberations Medei ros’s 
motives for bringing suit.  
  Choy  argues that regardless of the accuracy of the 
instruction as a statement of law, the court was not obligated 
to include it in its charge to the ju ry because it was not 
applicable to the issues raised during trial.   But as Choy 
admits, he so ught to elicit evidence for the purpose of 
demonstrating that Medeiros committed worker’s compensation 
fraud for monetary gain and that the lawsuit was similarly 
motivated.   Without the requested instruction, a jury could 
readily believe that the lawsuit was part  of that alleged scheme  
and thus shared a common motivation --indeed, Choy encouraged the 
jurors to so conclude, stating in closing argument that the jury 
would not be proud of a verdict in Medeiros’s fav or because it 
would “accomplish[]  exactly what she set out to accomplish the 
moment she informed Dr. Miscovich she was in a car accident and 
then convert it to a workers’  compensation claim. ” 
  Alternately, a juror might believe that Medeiros 
became emboldened by the success of her  initial worker’s 
compensation fraud and decided to extract further monetary gain 
from the same fabrication by bringing a lawsuit.  Under HRE Rule ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 34 404(b) (1994), evidence of past wrongs is inadmissible to prove 
a person’s character in order to show actions in conformity 
therewith.  The absence of the requested jury instruction 
allowed the jury to infer such an impermissible  connection 
between the allegedly fraudulent worker’s compensation claim and 
the lawsuit.  Further, a juror unfamiliar with the functioning 
of the worker’s compensation regime might believe the lawsuit 
was in some way needed to fulfill Medeiros ’s legal obligations  
resulting from the payment of the worker’s compensation claim--a 
misconception Choy potentially reinforced by asserting in 
closing argument that Medeiros was attempting to hold him 
“responsible for reimbursing that false claim .”25  Without the 
requested instruction, a jury could base its verdict on this 
erroneous understanding. 
  Giv en the substantial possibility that the jury would 
consider the evidence adduced as it related to Medeiros’s 
motives for bringing suit, Medeiros’s proposed instruction was 
applicable to the issues raised by the case.  See Radford v. 
Morris, 52 Haw. 180, 186, 472 P.2d 500, 504 (1970) (holding that 
an instruction was required because “w ithout the instruction the 
                                                           
 25 Although Medeiros’s employe r would have had a right to recoup its 
expenditures from any recovery Medeiros received from Choy, our worker’s 
compensation laws do not mandate that an injured worker file suit against a 
responsible third party.  See Hawaii Revised Statutes § 386 -8 (2015) . ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 35 jury could [make] erroneous[] assum[ptions ]” about the 
applicable law).  In essence, the circuit court implicitly 
acknowledged the potentiality for misuse of the evidence when  it 
denied Medeiros’s requested  instruction.  The court noted that 
it would reconsider the request if Choy mentioned Medeiros’s 
motives for bringing suit in his closing argument.  But in 
recognizing the possibility of Choy arguing  about Medeiros’s 
motives in closing argument, the court effectively found that 
inferences about Medeiros’s motives co uld be made from the 
evidence.  See State v. McGhee , 140 Hawai i 113, 119, 398 P.3d 
702, 708 (2017).  This recognition of the state of the evidence 
necessitated the timely submission of the requested jury 
instruction to restrict the jury from using that  evidence to 
consider Medeiros’s motive in bringing her claim .  See Hawaii 
Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 51(c )-(d) (2000) (setting forth a 
settlement and revision process to take place “ prior to 
[counsel’s] arguments to the jury ”).  The court was not at 
liberty to defer its submission 
of the instruction based on the 
extent that the closing argument dwelled on the alleged improper 
motive in bringing the law suit. 
  Thus, b ecause the jury instruction was a correct 
statement of the law, was applicable to the issues presented, 
and was not covered by other instructions, the circuit court was 
required to submit it to the jury.  Gibo v. City & Cty. of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 36 Honolulu , 51 Haw. 299,  304, 459 P.2d 198,  201 (1969).  We 
presume that the court’s  failure to do so was  prejudicial unless 
it affirmatively appears that the error was harmless.  Nelson v. 
Univ. of Haw. , 97 Hawai i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 (2001).  
Considering the record as a whole and in light of  Choy’s closing 
argument, the failure to submit the instruction was not 
harmless.  
See Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai i 313, 334, 300 
P.3d 579, 600 (2013) (holding that the “City’ s closing argument 
added to the harm caused by the circuit court’ s erroneous jury 
instruction” (quoting Kobashigawa v. Silva , 126 Hawai i 62, 66-
67, 266 P.3d 470, 474- 75 (App. 2011)) ); see also  id. (stating 
that “in conjunction with the lower court ’s failure to properly 
instruct the jury, a defense counsel ’s reference to the 
plaintiff’s motive in bringing suit was grounds for a new trial”  
(citing Kakligian v. Henry Ford Hosp. , 48 Mich. App. 325, 210 
N.W.2d 463, 465 (1973)) ). 
B. Restricting Consideration of Motive for Bringing S uit on 
Remand Will Address the Prejudice that the ICA Ascribed to the 
Challenged Testimony. 
  Choy argues that
 the ICA erred in holding that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in admitting  testimony 
regarding the presence of a child and the retrieval and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 37 installation of a car seat in the backseat of Aggasid’s 
vehicle.26 
  As an initial matter, the ICA held that the issue of 
Medeiros’s presence in Aggasid’s  vehicle at the time of the 
accident was inseparable from her motives for filing suit, and 
that under Kobashigawa , these motives were immaterial.  The ICA 
concluded that the testimony regarding the child and the 
retrieved car seat was therefore not admissible for the purpose 
of proving Medeiros ’s presence in the vehicle  at the time of the 
accident (although the court ultimately held that the evidence 
was relevant to show the parties’ position in the vehicle  when 
the accident occurred) .  However,  Medeiros’s alleged absence 
from the vehicle bore on more than simply her motives for 
bringing suit.  If true, Medeiros’s absence would definitively 
settle the issue of causation because Medeiros could not have 
been injured by Choy if she was not present in 
Aggasid’s vehicle 
                                                           
 26 Choy contends that Medeiros did not properly preserve this issue 
because the circuit court’s denial of Medeiros’s motion in limine was not a 
definitive ruling on admissibility and Medeiros did not renew her objection 
when testimony concerning the challenged subject matter was elicited at 
trial.  See Craft v. Peebles , 78 Hawai i 287, 295, 893 P.2d 138, 146 (1995) 
(holding that, absent a definitive pretrial ruling on admissibility, a 
renewed objection at trial is required to preserve the issue for appellate 
review).  Medeiros responds that, because Choy did not argue this point 
before the ICA, his argument is itself waived.  See Hawaii Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) (2016) (specifying that arguments not raised before 
the ICA may be deemed waived).  In light of our disposition of this case, it 
is not necessary to addres s whether the challenge to the testimony’s 
admissibility was properly preserved or whether the issue of preservation has 
been waived. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 38 at the time of the collision.  Whether Medeiros was present was 
thus of great consequence in determining the action, and 
evidence bearing on her  presence in the vehicle was relevant.27   
  T he ICA held that the circuit court abused its 
discretion by failing to exclude the testimony under HRE Rule 
403 (1993).  HRE Rule 403 provides that even “relevant[] 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the 
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue 
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative 
evidence.”  Unfair prejudice “ means an undue tendency to suggest 
decision on an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, 
an emotional one.”  Samson v. Nahulu , 136 Hawai i 415, 430, 363 
P.3d 263, 278 (2015) (quoting HRE Rule 403, Commentary). 
                                                           
 27 Choy argues at length that the testimony regarding the presence 
of a child also demonstrates that Medeiros filed a frau dulent worker’s 
compensation claim, and that this bears on her credibility as a witness.  HRE 
Rule 608(b) (1993) permits witnesses to be impeached by specific instances of 
conduct that are probative of untruthfulness.  The allegations of worker’s 
compensation fraud have very minimal probative value with respect to 
Medeiros’s credibility because they have largely the same factual predicate 
as the ultimate issue in this case--namely, whether Medeiros was injured in 
the January 23, 2007 accident that Choy caused.  In other words, the issue 
would have very little bearing on Medeiros’s credibility because Medeiros’s 
presence or absence from the collision is determinative both of her claim and 
the alleged fraud.  Consequently, any probative value the allegations have on 
Medeiros’s character for veracity is far outweighed by the potential for the 
jury to improperly consider the evidence with respect to Medeiros’s motives 
for bringing suit.  See  supra.  Thus, even if the evidence were admissible 
for this purpose under HRE Rule 608(b), it would undoubtedly be excluded 
under HRE Rule 403. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 39   The ICA concluded that the probative value of the 
testimony regarding the child and retrieved car seat was 
substantially outweighed by its potential for creating unfair 
prejudice against Medeiros because the circuit court did not 
provide Medeiros’s requested jury instruction, which permitted 
Choy to frequently reference the evidence in conjunction with 
Medeiros’s allegedly improper motives.  
Choy’s remarks 
throughout the trial created a substantial likelihood that the 
jury would consider the evidence for an improper purpose, the 
ICA held.28  In light of our remand for a new trial, the same 
consideration should not arise given our ruling that the jury 
must be instructed to not consider the Plaintiff’s motives in 
bringing the lawsuit.  Consequently, the challenged testimony on 
remand would not be excludable under HRE Rule 403 based solely 
on the concern that the jury would consider the evidence as it 
bears on Medeiros’ s motivation for bringing suit.29   
                                                           
 28 It is noted that the ICA erred to the extent that it considered 
Choy’s comments during closing arguments as part of its evaluation in 
determining the admissibility of the challenged  testimony under HRE Rule 403.  
 29 At trial, Choy elicited testimony and made comments in his 
closing argument indicating that the child alleged to be present in Aggasid’s 
vehicle was not properly restrained prior to and during the accident.  
Additionally, Choy has made numerous references to the allegedly unrestrained 
status of the child in his filings on appeal and to this court.  Although we 
have determined that evidence regarding the alleged presence of the child and 
the retrieval of a car seat would not  be excludable under HRE Rule 403 on the 
ground that the jury would potentially consider the evidence with respect to 
Medeiros’s motivation in bringing suit --as the jury would be instructed that 
it may not consider the evidence for this purpose--testimony or argument as 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 40 IV. CONCLUSION 
  For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the jury 
should have been instructed to disregard Medeiros’s motives for 
bringing suit, and the circuit court’s failure to do so was 
prejudicial error.  We therefore affirm the ICA ’s July 13, 2016  
judgment on appeal and remand the case to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
Thomas Tsuchiyama  
for petitioner  
 
Derek S. Nakamura  
for respondent  
 /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
to the safety risk of an unrestrained child, violation of safety laws, or 
endangerment of a child would be subject to HRE Rules 401 and 403 on retrial.  
