 
         
         
         
          
         
          ***FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST’S  HAWAI'I  REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER*** 
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-29044 27-JAN-2012 
11:17 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
vs.
 
BRANDON VALEROS, Petitioner/Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. SCWC-29044
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(ICA NO. 29044; CR. NO. 06-1-2281)
 
January 27, 2012
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, ACOBA, DUFFY, AND MCKENNA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY ACOBA, J.
 
We hold in this case that the failure of Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai
'i (the prosecution) to disclose an alibi-
rebuttal witness was a violation of Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
1
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12.1,  even though the witness had been
1
 HRPP Rule 12.1 (2007) provides, in relevant part as follows:
 
(a) Notice by Defendant. If a defendant intends to
 
rely upon the defense of alibi, the defendant shall, within
the time provided for the filing of pretrial motions or at
such later time as the court may direct, notify the
prosecutor in writing of such intention and file a copy of
         
    
       
          
        
          
         
         
           
          
        
         
         
        
        
   
         
         
        
        
         
        
          
         
        
          
          
           
  
 
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
previously listed as the alibi witness of Petitioner/Defendant-
Appellant Brandon Valeros (Defendant), but apparently unbeknownst
 to Defendant became the prosecution’s witness. Hence, in the
 absence of a showing of good cause under HRPP Rule 12.1(f) for
 granting an exception to the requirements of HRPP Rule 12.1, it
 
2
was error for the circuit court of the first circuit  (the court)
to allow that witness to testify in order to rebut Defendant’s
 alibi defense. For the reasons stated herein then, we vacate the
 court’s February 5, 2008 judgment of conviction and sentence of
 
such notice with the court.
 
(b) Disclosure of Information and Witnesses. Upon
receipt of notice that the defendant intends to rely upon an
alibi defense, the prosecutor shall inform the defendant in
writing of the specific time, date, and place at which the
offense is alleged to have been committed. The defendant
 shall then inform the prosecutor in writing of the specific
place at which the defendant claims to have been at the time
of the alleged offense and the names and addresses of the
witnesses upon whom the defendant intends to rely to
establish such alibi. The prosecutor shall then inform the
defendant in writing of the names and addresses of the
witnesses upon whom the government intends to rely to
establish defendant's presence at the scene of the alleged
offense .
 
. . . .
 
(d) Continuing Duty to Disclose. If prior to or
during trial, a party learns of an additional witness whose
identity, if known, should have been included in the
information furnished under section (b) of this rule, the
party shall promptly notify the other party or the party’s
attorney of the existence and identity of such additional
witness .
 
(e) Failure to Comply. Upon the failure of either
party to comply with the requirements of this rule, the
court may exclude the testimony of any undisclosed witness
offered by such party as to the defendant's absence from, or
presence at, the scene of the alleged offense. This rule
 shall not limit the right of the defendant to testify in the
defendant’s own behalf.
 
F
or  good  cause  shown,  the  court  may
 (f)   E xceptions.    
grant  an  exception  to  any  of  the  requirements  of  this  rule.
 
(E
mphases added.)
 
2
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 
2
         
  
           
             
        
           
               
          
  
          
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Defendant and the Intermediate Court of Appeals’s (ICA) June 3,
 
2011 judgment filed pursuant to its May 16, 2011 Summary
 
3
Disposition Order  affirming the February 5, 2008 judgment, and
remand the case for a new trial. 
I.
 
On November 6, 2006, Defendant allegedly assaulted
 
Kenneth Ring, the complaining witness (CW), with a collapsible
 metal baton outside the “Exotic Nights” nightclub (Exotic
 Nights), near the Ward Avenue and Halekauwila Street intersection
 in Honolulu. On November 13, 2006, Defendant was charged by
 Felony Information with Assault in the Second Degree, HRS § 707­711(1)(d) (Supp. 2006).
4
 
A. 
The following essential matters, some verbatim, are
 
from the record and the submissions of the parties.
 
5
On March 20, 2007, before trial,  Defendant filed a
Notice of Alibi pursuant to HRPP Rule 12.1. The prosecution
 replied that it would rely on CW and CW’s friend Robert Miller
 (Miller), who was with CW on the night in question, to establish
 that the offense was “committed on November 6, 2006, at
 
3
 State v. Valeros , No. 29044, 2011 WL 1909109 (Haw. App. May 16,
 
2011). The SDO was filed by Presiding Judge Daniel R. Foley and Associate
Judges Alexa D.M. Fujise and Katherine G. Leonard.
 
4
 HRS § 707-711(1) provides in relevant part: “(1) A person commits
 
the offense of assault in the second degree if[] . . . . (d) [t]he person
intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury to another person with a
dangerous instrument[.]”
 
5
 Trial was originally scheduled to commence on June 25, 2007, but
 
was continued. Trial began on November 9, 2007.
 
3
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
approximately 2:20 a.m.[,] at or near the intersection of
 
Halekau[w]ila Street and Ward Avenue[.]” On April 11, 2007,
 Defendant filed a response, stating that on the date and time of
 the offense, Defendant was in the “Club Electro” (Club Electro)
 parking lot in Pearl City, Oahu, with alibi witnesses Jamison
 Benavides (Benavides) and Timothy Santiago (Santiago). Defendant
 provided addresses and phone numbers for these witnesses.
 
Defendant’s trial counsel declared that on June 15,
 
2007, the prosecution informed the court and Defendant that it
 was having difficulty contacting Defendant’s alibi witnesses. On
 July 18, 2007, David Lee, an investigator for the prosecution
 (investigator), visited Santiago in the Kalihi area on Oahu and
 obtained a verbal statement from him, which the prosecution
 apparently believed rebutted Defendant’s alibi. Santiago refused
 to give a written statement. The prosecution did not notify or
 disclose this information to Defendant. 
According to Defendant’s trial counsel’s later
 
declaration in support of Defendant’s motion for a new trial, on
 August 24, 2007, the prosecution informed the court and opposing
 counsel that it could not confirm the alibi and that the
 prosecution would be proceeding to trial. Then, “[a]t a
 scheduling conference prior to trial,” on November 6, 2007,
 Defendant informed all parties that he would only call Benavides
 because Defendant could no longer locate Santiago. 
4
         
 
          
           
         
       
        
         
           
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
However, at the November 15, 2007 post-trial conference
 
to settle jury instructions, the prosecution disclosed that
 
within “two days” of being informed that Defendant could not
 locate Santiago, Santiago was discovered on the Big Island, and
 “was [thereafter] returned to Oahu to testify in [Respondent’s]
 rebuttal case.” The record does not reflect the exact dates when
 Respondent located Santiago on the Big Island (as opposed to July
 18 in the Kalihi area on Oahu), but “two days” from the time
 Defendant told the prosecution that Santiago could not be located
 would have fallen on November 8, 2007. 
B.
 1.
 
On November 8, 2007, jury selection commenced. The
 
case proceeded to trial the next day, November 9, 2007. 
During its opening statement, the prosecution told the
 
jury that the evidence would show that Defendant committed the
 charged offense, and that Defendant would be relying on an alibi
 defense:
 
Now we expect that the defense which is under no obligation
to put on any defense at all but will present witnesses that
will say that [Defendant and his associates] weren’t [at the
scene], so-called alibi witnesses, but those very witnesses
are Jamison Benavides and perhaps Timothy Santiago which the
State will show are simply not believable witnesses and have
every reason to make up this story, to make up this alibi,
[sic] will not be credible.
 
During his opening statement, Defendant told the jury that at the
 
time of the incident, Defendant was “miles away in Pearl City 
5
         
    
   
          
        ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
. . . with his own friends, doing his own thing, having his own
 
fun.”
 
2. 
At trial, CW testified that around 10:30 or 11:00 p.m.
 
on November 6, 2006, he and two associates, Miller and Durham,
 went to club “Femme Nu” (Femme Nu) where they had four to five
 drinks. Approximately three hours later, CW and his friends went
 to Exotic Nights, located on Ward Avenue. CW testified that he
 was not “completely intoxicated” but had a “buzz.” After
 spending fifteen minutes at Exotic Nights, the trio left and
 walked towards Ward Avenue, near Sports Authority, to hail a
 taxi. 
As CW and his two friends were walking, they saw a
 
“flat bed pickup truck with two gentlemen on the back” and one
 man in the front cabin. The truck stopped approximately twelve
 feet from CW, and three men exited the vehicle. When the men,
 whom CW described as “Polynesian, maybe Samoan,” were about ten
 feet away, one of them deployed a metal baton. Miller and Durham
 ran away, but CW sat on the sidewalk “right in front” of the
 pickup truck and watched the men chase his friends.
6
 
After chasing Miller and Durham for about five seconds,
 
the three men returned to the truck and saw CW. The man holding
 
6
 CW’s friends were Caucasian; CW, who was half white and half
 
Asian, felt that he could avoid any confrontation.
 
6
         
          
             
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7
the collapsible metal baton  approached CW and asked him if he was
“looking for trouble.” CW said he was looking for a taxi, and
 
the man struck CW on the head with the baton saying, “Don’t go
 looking for trouble.” CW believed that he suffered a slight
 concussion. The men then drove off and Durham and Miller called
 the police. 
Officer Tanita testified that he responded to a call
 
around 2:23 in the morning requesting assistance regarding an
 incident on Ward Avenue. 
When Officer Tanita arrived at the
 
scene, CW said that a man had “hit” him. CW then gave Officer
 Tanita a description of the assailant. 
There were some discrepancies between the description
 
of the assailant noted by Officer Tanita and that offered by CW
 during trial. At trial, CW testified that he verbally told
 Officer Tanita that his assailant was a large Polynesian male,
 approximately five feet nine inches to five feet ten inches in
 height, weighing approximately 200 to 220 pounds, who had
 “tribal” tattoos “running down both sides of his arms and that he
 also had a chain.” He denied telling Officer Tanita that the
 suspect had long hair. CW also testified that he told Officer
 Tanita that he believed the truck in which his attacker and the
 other men had ridden was a black Ford pickup truck. 
7
 CW testified that he was familiar with collapsible batons. He
 
testified that a collapsible baton is six inches in length, can expand to 12
or 16 inches, and can have three or four sections.
 
7
         
         
             
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Officer Tanita testified that, after hearing CW’s
 
8
version of events, he filled out a “252” statement  because CW was
not “calm” enough to write it himself. Officer Tanita recalled
 
that CW told him that the vehicle in which four (not three) male
 suspects rode was a black Ford “F150,” and that the man who
 struck CW was a local “Polynesian,” five feet nine inches tall,
 who was wearing a white shirt. Officer Tanita remembered that CW
 did not mention that the suspect had earrings, piercings on his
 face, floppy shoelaces, or a chain hanging from his clothing. 
Officer Tanita could not recall if CW told him that the suspect
 had tattoos. Officer Tanita indicated, however, that he may have
 been mistaken about the description because he “[u]sually . . .
 ha[s] eight to a dozen” reports to fill out in a night. Officer
 Tanita stated CW appeared to be under the influence of alcohol,
 but seemed coherent. 
At the scene, CW’s friend Miller also provided a
 
description of the assailant and completed a “252" statement. 
At trial, Miller admitted that in his 252 statement he indicated
 that the suspect had black hair and was wearing shorts. 
He did
 
not say that the suspect had tattoos. He also stated, “[w]e may
 be able to identify but it would be difficult. I was not able to
 get the license plate number. My opinion is that it was . . .
 [a] short bed pickup truck with a bedliner.” 
8
 According to Officer Tanita, a “252" statement is an “official
 
statement form which the victim . . . writes their [sic] statement of what
happened[.]”
 
8
         
         
              
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
After giving a statement to the police, Miller caught a
 
taxi with CW and Durham back to Waikiki. Miller then decided to
 
go to club “Zanzabar” (Zanzabar). As he was walking toward
 Zanzabar, Miller noticed that the men “that were involved with
 the assault on [CW] were just standing there.” Miller then
 walked over to a police officer and told the officer that the men
 had assaulted his friends. The officer then asked the two men
 “to come with [him].” A third suspect, later identified as
 Benavides, was apprehended by a second officer.
 
According to Miller, the officers then drove him to
 
CW’s hotel. At approximately 5:00 a.m., CW and Miller were
 
9
separately brought to a three person field show-up  in Waikiki,
consisting of Defendant, Benavides, and Santiago. CW identified
 Defendant as his attacker. After Defendant was arrested, an
 officer searched Defendant but did not find any weapons or
 batons. 
Miller then completed another “252" form. 
At trial, he
 
acknowledged that in his “252" form he did not indicate that the
 suspect had orange hair, big boots, jeans, a “hippy chain” or
 tattoos. Nonetheless, Miller testified that he “remember[ed]”
 “very clear[ly]” the man that hit CW, and described him as having
 “orange hair, a black shirt, a hippy chain, big boots, and
 jeans.” According to Miller, the assailant was a “heavyset
 
9
 A showup is “a pretrial identification procedure in which a
 
suspect is confronted with a witness or the victim of the crime.” B LACK’S LAW
 
DICTIONARY 1506 (9th ed. 2009).
 
9
          
   
           
          ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Polynesian,” “probably 250 pounds[,]” that had “tattoos up and
 
down on his arms[.]” 
3.
 
Defendant and his friend Benavides also testified at
 
trial to their version of the events. According to Benavides,
 who was six feet and 290 pounds, on the night in question he
 drove himself, Defendant, Santiago and his friend Ryan Yamashita
 [(Yamashita)] in a Honda Civic to Club Electro.” Benavides
 testified he did not own a truck.
10
 
After leaving Club Electro at approximately 2:00 a.m.,
 
the men smoked cigarettes in the club’s parking lot. Benavides
 then drove Defendant, Yamashita, and Santiago in his Honda Civic
 to the “Big Kahuna” nightclub (Big Kahuna) in Waikiki. He
 traveled down Kamehameha Highway, entered the H-1 freeway, and
 took the King Street exit to Kapahulu. He did not stop anywhere
 between Club Electro and Waikiki, and parked by the zoo. Upon
 leaving Big Kahuna, Yamashita left the group. The three
 remaining men were then stopped by the police and were told to
 sit down because they were being placed in a lineup. 
Defendant’s testimony was consistent with that of
 
Benavides. Defendant, who was five feet nine inches tall and
 weighed 320 pounds, testified that on the night in question he
 was wearing a black shirt, cut off jeans, and combat boots with
 
10
 However, he owned a “tow truck” that has “the equipment for towing
 
and whatnot in it.” He owned, and ran, “Kinetic Towing.”
 
10
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
red laces that laced up to the bottom of his calf. His hair was
 
almost white, or bleach blonde with streaks, and he had a goatee
 down to the bottom of his chin. He had seven earrings and two
 piercings on his lips. On the night in question, he had been
 carrying a chain wallet connecting his wallet to his belt loop. 
He also had tattoos, consisting of a “skull with a dagger,
 covered in spider webs[,]” “random old school style tattoos[,]”
 “a man engulfed in flames, and a woman.”
 
Defendant testified that after spending some time in
 
Waikiki, he was walking back to Benavides’s vehicle when one of
 his friends pulled up with a tow truck. Defendant talked to his
 friend for a second, and when Defendant turned around, the police
 asked him to step away from the vehicle. Defendant also
 testified that he had never been to Exotic Nights and did not
 know where it was located, was not in the area of Ward and
 Halekauwila on the night in issue, had never seen CW prior to
 seeing him in court, had never held a baton, and never struck CW.
 
II.
 
On November 14, 2007, during the testimony of the
 
prosecution’s last witness, the court recessed trial for fifteen
 minutes. According to the declaration of Defendant’s trial
 counsel, at that point, “the court met in chambers with both
 parties[.]” The prosecution stated that it would object if
 Defendant was allowed to present his case on the following day
 because a “‘rebuttal’ witness [the prosecution] had flown in” was
 
11
         
         
          
          
            
           
           
            
    ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
scheduled to fly out that day. “It was only at this time the
 
defense learned [the prosecution] had intended to call []
 Santiago” to “rebut [Defendant’s] alibi.” 
After the testimony of the last witness, the
 
prosecution rested and the court released the jury for its lunch
 break. When the jury was no longer in the courtroom, Defendant
 orally moved for a judgment of acquittal, which the court denied. 
Defendant then asked that the prosecution make Santiago available
 for Defendant’s counsel to speak to him. Counsel was concerned
 that, if Santiago’s testimony was inconsistent with what he had
 previously related to counsel, counsel might have to become a
 witness to rebut Santiago’s testimony and, as a consequence,
 counsel would have to move for a mistrial.
11 Defendant’s counsel
 
was permitted to speak to Santiago. 
After talking to Santiago, Defendant objected to the
 
prosecution calling Santiago to testify as a rebuttal witness, as
 a violation of HRPP Rule 12.1. Defendant maintained that the
 prosecution was required to give Defendant “written notice and
 [the] contact information of the names of people [the
 prosecution] intend[ed] to call.” Defendant also objected on the
 ground that Santiago was not a proper rebuttal witness because
 
11
 During this exchange, it also appears that Defendant sought to
 
compel the prosecution to turn over Santiago’s statement under HRPP Rule
16(b)(1) (requiring the prosecution to disclose “the names and last known
 addresses of persons whom the prosecutor intends to call as witnesses in the
presentation of the evidence in chief, together with any relevant written or
recorded statements”). The court denied the request to turn over the
 statement. Since other issues are dispositive in this case, we need not
address HRPP Rule 16.
 
12
         
      
          
          
       
          
           
           
         
        
      
            
           
            
           
          
         
          
          
             
         
          
      ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Defendant believed Santiago’s testimony would reinforce
 
Defendant’s alibi. The prosecution replied that it did not have
 to disclose Santiago because Santiago had been disclosed to the
 prosecution by Defendant. Further, according to the prosecution,
 Santiago’s statement to the prosecution rebutted Defendant’s
 alibi. The court overruled Defendant’s objection. 
Defendant then renewed his objection: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: [The prosecution] is right,
partially right, okay, insofar as we give our notice. They
 
respond. We respond with specific names. And then after
 
their investigation, if they’re going to have specific
witnesses to rebut us, they need to give us written notice
of that . And the way [the prosecution] is trying to hedge
around that rule is by saying he’s a rebuttal witness. He
 doesn’t have to give us notice. Because it’s specifically
to rebut our alibi we’re entitled to that notice .
 
And furthermore, [the prosecution] knew we were
looking for this guy. And [I] told the [c]ourt as much when
[the prosecution] was present that I lost him. I can’t find
 him. [The prosecution] . . . obviously knew where he was to
the point where they had to make arrangements to fly him in.
[THE PROSECUTION]: We didn’t know where he was. We
 
thought along until last -- when our status conference was,
I think last week sometime, whenever it was when you said
you weren’t calling [] Santiago is when I realized that you
weren’t calling [] Santiago. And I had to go look for him .
And that was based on defense’s representation. They gave
us an alibi witness name and then they don’t call him.
[THE COURT]: Overruled at this time.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
III.
 
Over Defendant’s objection, Santiago testified as a
 
rebuttal witness. Santiago stated that on the night in question
 
he went to Club Electro. He knew Defendant as a friend of
 Benavides. Santiago said he was “drunk” when he left the club,
 at which point he and Defendant entered Benavides’s car. 
According to Santiago, there was no one else in the car. 
Santiago could not recall what kind of car it was. 
13
         
         
     ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Santiago testified that he “dozed” and “woke up chasing
 

 some guy[]”12 on “Ala Moana Boulevard[,]” but could not recall why
he was chasing the man, and could not remember the location of
 
Benavides and Defendant. Santiago then returned to the vehicle,
 went back to sleep, and woke up in Waikiki. He did not know what
 happened from the time he left the club to the time he awoke in
 Waikiki. Santiago said he could not remember because he had “a
 lot” to drink. 
Santiago recalled that an investigator subsequently
 
asked him about the incident, but he could not recall telling the
 investigator what kind of vehicle Benavides was driving or what
 happened on the way to Waikiki. 
Santiago remembered that the
 
investigator asked him questions, including whether Santiago
 would complete a statement on a piece of paper. Santiago refused
 because he “didn’t really trust” the investigator and felt that
 the investigator was trying to put words in his mouth. 
Santiago also said he did not want to fill out a form
 
because he did not want his statement to be different from what
 he might have said to a “lady attorney[.]” Santiago was “not too
 sure” what he told the investigator. When pressed by the
 prosecutor, Santiago could not recall chasing a male or males
 toward Exotic Nights, did not remember being near Sports 
12
 On redirect, Santiago was asked, “[D]o you remember chasing some
 
guys[?]” He responded, “Yes.”
 
14
         
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Authority, and did not remember telling the investigator that he
 
was chasing males with Defendant.
 
During Santiago’s testimony, the court asked counsel to
 
approach the bench and told the prosecution that if Santiago
 could not remember what he told the investigator, the
 investigator’s testimony regarding what Santiago said was hearsay
 and would only be admitted in evidence to impeach Santiago.
 When Santiago finished testifying, the prosecution called its
 investigator as a witness. Before the investigator testified,
 the court gave the jury a limiting instruction, telling the jury
 that it could only consider the investigator’s testimony to weigh
 Santiago’s credibility. 
The investigator testified that Santiago said he had
 
been a passenger in a pickup truck that had stopped at the Sports
 Authority intersection. The investigator was asked, “Did
 [Santiago] indicate what he was doing specifically at that stop
 light?” The court again instructed the jury that the
 investigator’s statements were “not allowed for the truth of what
 is being stated, but for credibility purposes of a prior
 witness.” The investigator related that Santiago said that he
 was a “passenger in a pickup” and that “he doesn’t know why, but
 [Defendant] and he started chasing two guys down the road away
 from Sports Authority towards Exotic Nights.”
 
IV.
 
The next day, while discussing jury instructions,
 
15
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Defendant’s counsel asked that the limiting instruction regarding
 
the investigator’s testimony be included in the final jury
 instructions. The court denied the request, but cautioned the
 prosecutor that Santiago’s statements to the investigator could
 not be used as “rebuttal evidence” during closing argument.
 
In closing argument, the prosecutor argued to the jury
 
that Santiago had testified to a “half-truth” because he
 remembered “chasing two guys” with another person, and that
 Santiago’s testimony placed him and Defendant “on Ward Avenue,
 near Sports Authority, chasing guys.” The prosecution then told
 the jury, “That right there does in their alibi. That alone
 kills the defense.” After deliberation, the jury found Defendant
 guilty as charged of the offense of Assault in the Second Degree. 
V. 
On appeal to the ICA, Defendant argued in pertinent
 
part that (1) the prosecution’s last minute disclosure of
 Santiago’s alibi rebuttal testimony violated HRPP Rule 12.1 and
 Defendant’s constitutional rights; and (2) the prosecution
 committed misconduct in closing argument by violating the court’s
 instruction that Santiago’s statements to the investigator could
 be considered by the jury for impeachment purposes only. The ICA
 rejected Defendant’s points of error, affirmed the court’s
 decision, and denied Defendant’s request to reverse his
 conviction or remand for a new trial. Valeros, 2011 WL 1909109,
 
at *1-2. 
16
         
           
       
 
         
         
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
VI.
 
In his Application, Defendant presents the following
 
two questions: 
(1) Whether the ICA gravely erred in affirming the . . .
court’s admission of Santiago’s testimony as an alibi
rebuttal witness.
 (2) Whether the ICA gravely erred in concluding that the
prosecutor did not violate the . . . court’s limiting
instruction during closing argument.
 
Our resolution of the first question is dispositive,
 
and thus we do not reach the second question posed by Defendant. 
VII.
 
A.
 
As to his first question, Defendant asserts that the
 
prosecution should have disclosed Santiago to the defense as an
 
“additional witness” under HRPP Rule 12.1(b) and (d) when the
 prosecution learned that Santiago would provide evidence to rebut
 Defendant’s alibi. Noting that HRPP Rule 12.1(e) nevertheless
 gave the court discretion to admit the testimony, Defendant
 argues that the “opportunity to conduct an on-the-spot interview
 in the middle of trial did not cure the undeniably prejudicial
 effect on the defense strategy when defense counsel had prepared
 for trial on the assumptions that (1) Santiago’s prior statement
 to her confirmed the alibi, but despite her best efforts to
 locate him, she (2) had to proceed to trial without Santiago
 because she was unable to locate him.” 
According to Defendant, “a judicial finding that
 
defense counsel’s last-minute, during-trial interview of a
 
17
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
possibly recanting witness as an adequate remedy for the
 
prosecution’s nondisclosure is hugely problematic” because it
 “compels the lawyer to make herself a witness[.]” Finally,
 Defendant contends that the prosecution’s “tactics” “violated
 Defendant’s right to present his alibi defense, [his] due process
 right to a fair trial, and were not harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt, where the alibi defense was Defendant’s sole defense.”
 
The prosecution counters that HRPP Rule 12.1(e) gives
 
the court discretion to allow the testimony of the undisclosed
 witness. HRPP Rule 12.1(e) provides that “[u]pon the failure of
 either party to comply with the requirements of this rule, the
 court may exclude the testimony of any undisclosed
 witness . . . .” (Emphasis added). According to the
 prosecution, “[a]s such it is clear . . . that the circuit court
 is provided the discretion of allowing or disallowing the
 testimony of any undisclosed witness.” The prosecution also
 argues that, assuming arguendo that Defendant is correct that the
 prosecution should have disclosed Santiago as a witness pursuant
 to HRPP Rule 12.1(b), the court did not abuse its discretion in
 allowing Santiago to testify because Defendant had interviewed
 Santiago prior to trial regarding the night in question;
 Defendant was allowed to interview Santiago before he testified;
 and Defendant failed to request a continuance based on the
 allowance of Santiago’s testimony. (Citing State v. Miller, 67
 Haw. 121, 680 P.2d 251 (1984)). 
18
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
B. 
The ICA held that the “HRPP Rule 12.1(b) does not
 
initially require disclosure unless a party intends to rely on a
 
witness[;] and it does not appear from the record that [the
 prosecution] intended to rely on Santiago as a witness at the
 time of its initial disclosure.” Valeros, 2011 WL 1909109, at
 
*1. As to HRPP Rule 12.1(d), the ICA held that Rule 12.1(d)
 “only applies to an ‘additional witness whose identity, if known
 should have been included in the information furnished’ pursuant
 to the required disclosures under HRPP Rule 12.1(b).” Id. 
Because Santiago had already been disclosed by the defense, the
 ICA concluded that “he was not an ‘additional witness’ within the
 meaning of [HRPP Rule 12.1(d)].” Id. Finally, the ICA concluded
 
that Rule 12.1(e) did not require the exclusion of the offending
 testimony. Id. According to the ICA, “[w]here Santiago was
 
originally [Defendant’s] own witness and the [] court gave
 [Defendant] an opportunity to re-interview Santiago prior to the
 latter’s testimony at trial, it was not an abuse of discretion to
 allow Santiago’s testimony.” Id. 
VIII.
 
It is undisputed from the record that the prosecution
 
did not disclose to Defendant that it would use Santiago as an
 “additional witness” to CW and Miller to counteract the alibi
 defense. Disclosure was to have been “promptly” made, HRPP Rule
 12.1(d), when (1) the prosecution obtained Santiago’s verbal
 
19
         
          
            
           
             
           
              
         
          
             
           ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
statement to the investigator that Defendant was present at the
 
scene of the crime; and (2) when it determined that it would call
 Santiago as its witness, which occurred, at the latest, when it
 located Santiago on the Big Island and arranged to fly Santiago
 from the Big Island to testify. At such points, Santiago,
 although previously listed on Defendant’s list, became an
 “additional witness,” HRPP Rule 12.1(d), for the prosecution, and
 Santiago “should have been included in the information furnished
 under [HRPP Rule 12.1,] section (b)[.]” 
To reiterate, HRPP Rule 12.1(b) states that the
 
prosecution “shall . . . inform the defendant in writing of the
 names and addresses of the witnesses upon whom the government
 intends to rely to establish defendant’s presence at the scene of
 the alleged offense.” (Emphasis added.) In State v. Davis, 63
 Haw. 191, 194-95, 624 P.2d 376, 379 (1981), this court adopted
 the reasoning in Wardius v. Oregon, 412 U.S. 470 (1973), and held
 that HRPP Rule 12.1 provides for reciprocal discovery in
 conformance with due process and that discovery under HRPP Rule
 12.1 is a “two-way street.
13 Cf. State v. Dowsett, 10 Haw. App.
 
491, 498, 878 P.2d 739, 743 (1994) (“Discovery is at the very
 
13
 In Wardius , the United States Supreme Court reasoned that (1) the
 
Due Process Clause speaks “to the balance of forces between the accused and
 
his accuser” and thus “[i]t would be fundamentally unfair to require a
defendant to divulge the details of his own case while at the same time
subjecting him to the hazard of surprise concerning refutation of the very
pieces of evidence which he disclosed to the State,” 412 U.S. at 476; and (2)
that because the prosecution has greater financial and personnel resources
with which to investigate and scientifically analyze evidence, in addition to
a number of other tactical advantages, if there is to be any imbalance in
discovery rights, it should work in the defendant’s favor.
 id. at 476 n.9.
 
20
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
foundation of the fact finding process. Faithful adherence to
 
discovery obligations serves the public interest: Discovery
 provides the basic information which is necessary to expedite
 trials and plea decisions in an already overburdened court system
 and promotes fairness in the adversary system.”).
 
Davis held “that once defendant has furnished to the
 
government the names and addresses of his alibi witnesses,
 defendant has a reciprocal right to discover the names and
 addresses of witnesses the government intends to rely on to rebut
 or discredit defendant’s alibi witness.” 63 Haw. at 196, 624
 P.2d at 380 (emphasis added). Consequently, when the prosecution
 realized it was going to rely on Santiago to place Defendant at
 the scene of the offense, disclosure was required even though
 Santiago was not listed as such a witness in the prosecution’s
 initial notice of its witnesses under HRPP Rule 12.1(b). Under
 Davis, the prosecution was required to disclose that it would use
 Santiago to rebut or discredit Defendant’s alibi even though
 Santiago had been listed as a witness by the defense. See id. 
A. 
1. 
A plain reading of HRPP Rules 12.1(b) and 12.1(d)
 
indicates that the prosecution had a continuing duty to disclose
 Santiago as an “additional witness.” See Davis, 63 Haw. at 194,
 
196, 624 P.2d at 378, 380 (noting that “the government is
 required to disclose the identity of the witnesses on whom it
 
21
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
will rely to establish the defendant's presence at the scene of
 
the offense and of any other witnesses who will be used to rebut
 the testimony of defendant’s alibi witnesses[,]” and holding that
 once the “defendant has furnished to the government the names and
 addresses of his alibi witnesses, [the] defendant has a
 reciprocal right to discover the names and addresses of witnesses
 the government intends to rely on to rebut or discredit
 defendant's alibi witnesses”) (internal citation omitted). 
The ICA interpreted the words “should have been
 
included” in HRPP Rule 12.1(d) as limiting the duty to disclose a
 witness who was not disclosed “at the time of its initial
 disclosure[,]” under HRPP Rule 12.1(b), Valeros, 2011 WL 1909109,
 at *1, but whom the party knew at that time would place a
 defendant at the scene of the offense. However, this
 interpretation would defeat the purpose of HRPP Rule 12.1
 inasmuch as it would preclude disclosure of witnesses who were
 discovered after initial disclosure, i.e., “learn[ed]” of “prior
 to or during trial,” and would be inconsistent with the
 “[c]ontinuing duty to disclose,” (emphasis added), imposed by
 HRPP Rule 12.1(d). 
2. 
The obligation to notify the defendant of “the
 
existence and identity” of additional witnesses must be exercised
 “promptly,” HRPP Rule 12.1(d). The prosecution first contacted
 Santiago on July 18, 2007. At the latest, by November 8, 2007,
 
22
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
the prosecution knew that it would call Santiago as a witness, 
but it did not disclose his status as an alibi-rebuttal witness until November 14, just before the defense was to start its case, and after the prosecution had already flown Santiago from Hawai' i 
to Honolulu. Cf. State v. Sherman, 70 Haw. 334, 340, 770 P.2d 
789, 793 (1989) (noting that “the prosecution is obliged, within a reasonable time, to make available the specifics required by [HRPP Rule 12.1(b)]”); see also Paul’s Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 420, 91 P.3d 494, 502 (2004) (noting 
that this court has imported the reasonableness standard into HRPP Rule 12.1, even though the “time frame [i]s not specified” in that rule). 
3.
 
HRPP Rule 12.1(b) does not state that a party is
 
excused from disclosing a witness it intends to rely upon to
 rebut the defendant’s alibi, except as set forth in HRPP Rule
 12.1(f). According to the record, while Defendant had listed
 Santiago as an alibi witness, he had lost track of Santiago and
 was unaware that Santiago would instead be appearing as a
 rebuttal witness for the prosecution. Under these circumstances
 the prosecution concealed Santiago’s new status as its alibi-
rebuttal witness. See Sherman, 70 Haw. at 341, 770 P.2d at 793
 
(noting that the “purpose of the rule was to provide reciprocal
 discovery between the prosecution and the defense,” (emphasis in
 original), and that “[t]he adversary system of trial is hardly an
 
23
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
end in itself; it is not a poker game in which [the] players
 
enjoy an absolute right always to conceal their cards until
 played”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Thus,
 the prosecution’s failure to disclose Santiago as its rebuttal
 witness violated HRPP Rule 12.1. Id.
 
4. 
The court had the option, under HRPP Rule 12.1(e), to
 
exclude Santiago’s testimony. The ICA reasoned that because the
 court gave Defendant an opportunity to re-interview Santiago
 before he testified at trial, the court did not abuse its
 discretion when it did not exclude Santiago. The prosecution
 adds that Defendant had interviewed Santiago before trial and
 could have asked for a continuance.
 
However, the fact that Santiago was interviewed by
 
defense counsel before trial only magnified the prejudice to
 Defendant caused by the prosecution’s failure to name Santiago as
 its witness. Defendant had listed Santiago as his own alibi
 witness but was unable to subsequently locate him and was thus
 caught by surprise upon learning that Santiago was going to be
 called by the prosecution instead. 
The opportunity to interview Santiago during the middle
 
of trial did not cure the prejudice to Defendant from the
 prosecution’s failure to abide by HRPP Rule 12.1. HRPP Rule
 12.1(d) imposes a continuing duty to promptly disclose witnesses. 
Its purpose is precisely to avoid such mid-trial surprises. 
24
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
Additionally, had Defendant known before trial that the
 
prosecution intended to call Santiago as a rebuttal witness,
 
Defendant could have adjusted his trial strategy to avoid an
 alibi defense at all. Given the inconsistencies in the testimony
 of the prosecution’s eyewitnesses, CW and Miller, Defendant might
 have chosen to focus solely on calling into question the
 reliability of their identification testimony. That avenue was
 no longer open to Defendant when the prosecution belatedly
 revealed that it was going to call Santiago. By then, as
 Defendant asserted in oral argument before this court, Defendant
 was already committed to an alibi defense; both parties had
 discussed the alibi defense during their opening statements, and
 Defendant had pursued the defense during trial. In fact, at the
 time of its opening statement, the prosecution apparently knew
 Defendant could not locate Santiago and knew that it had obtained
 a statement from Santiago on July 18. The opportunity to
 interview Santiago during the middle of trial therefore did not
 mitigate the prejudice to Defendant. For the same reason, a
 continuance would not have mitigated the prejudice to Defendant. 
Accordingly, we reject the prosecution’s suggestion that
 Defendant was required to request a continuance in these
 circumstances. 
B. 
Under HRPP Rule 12.1(f), “the court may grant an
 
exception to any . . . requirements of [the] rule[]” only “[f]or
 
25
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
good cause shown[.]” The exception clause was not invoked by the
 
prosecution and no showing of good cause was made at trial under
 HRPP Rule 12.1(f). 
Davis is instructive in this regard. In Davis, the
 
defendant failed to notify the prosecution and the circuit court
 that he intended to rely on an alibi defense before trial, as
 required under HRPP Rule 12.1(a). 63 Haw. at 197, 624 P.2d at
 381. Instead, the defendant notified the court and the parties
 
that he would use an alibi defense only after the jury was
 selected. Id. The defendant testified at trial to such a
 
defense and sought to have an alibi witness testify. Id. The
 
circuit court disallowed the defendant’s alibi witness from
 testifying and imposed a sanction on the defendant because he
 failed to comply with HRPP Rule 12.1. Id. 
This court determined that the circuit court did not
 
abuse its discretion under HRPP Rule 12.1(e) in excluding the
 alibi witness. According to Davis, the circuit court had
 “discretion, upon a showing of good cause, to make exceptions to
 the rule so as to balance the interests of both the government
 and the defendant to give both an opportunity to discover on
 equal terms.” 63 Haw. at 198, 624 P.2d at 380-81 (emphasis
 added). Because there was no “good cause” shown for the
 defendant’s failure to comply with HRPP Rule 12.1, this court
 held the circuit court properly exercised its discretion in 
26
         
         
           
           
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
excluding the alibi witness from testifying. Id. at 197, 624
 
P.2d at 380-81.
 
IX.
 
In the instant case, as explained supra, the 
prosecution failed to abide by HRPP Rule 12.1 inasmuch as it had 
interviewed Santiago on July 18, 2007, and then discovered “two days” after the pretrial conference of November 6, 2007 that Santiago was on Hawai' i, but only disclosed Santiago as a rebuttal 
witness on November 14, the day that Defendant was to present his case at trial. This disclosure of Santiago, when it appears that the prosecution had obtained a statement on July 18, 2007, and knew of Santiago’s whereabouts before trial began and five days into the trial, was not made “promptly,” HRPP Rule 12.1(d), and was a violation of HRPP Rules 12.1(b) and (d). The record does not reflect any “showing of good cause” or an inquiry by the court as to why the prosecution failed to disclose Santiago sooner as a basis for granting an exception to the requirements of HRPP Rule 12.1. See HRPP Rule 12.1(f). 
Instead, the court overruled Defendant’s objection
14
 
that Santiago should not be allowed to testify because of the
 late disclosure, without providing any reasons. Respectfully,
 inasmuch as the court did not determine that “good cause” existed
 for applying an exception to the prosecution’s duty to adhere to
 
14
 To reiterate, Defendant objected on two grounds: that the
 
prosecution violated HRPP Rule 12.1, and that Santiago was not a proper
rebuttal witness. However, Defendant does not argue the latter on appeal,
and, as such, it is not addressed further.
 
27
         
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
HRPP Rule 12.1, the court’s overruling of Defendant’s objection
 
was in error. See Davis, 63 Haw. at 195-97, 624 P.2d at 379-81
 
(determining that a court may “make exceptions to the rule” only
 “upon a showing of good cause”). What matters is not whether
 Defendant knew about the existence of Santiago, but whether
 Defendant knew that the prosecution was going to use Santiago as
 a rebuttal witness to the alibi defense. See id. To avoid
 
unfairly surprising Defendant, it was necessary for the
 prosecution to comply with its obligation to notify Defendant
 that it intended to use Santiago as a rebuttal witness. See id. 
The prosecution did not do so. In this case, therefore,
 discovery was not a “two-way street,” and the prosecution’s
 failure to provide reciprocal discovery infringed upon
 Defendant’s due process rights. See id. at 195; 624 P.2d at 379.
 
X.
 
The remaining issue is whether the error was harmless.
 
When assessing whether an error is harmless, the question is
 whether, in light of the entire proceedings, there is “a
 reasonable possibility that [the] error might have contributed to
 the conviction.” State v. Veikoso, No. SCWC-30138, 2011 WL
 
4037979, at *10 (Haw. Sept. 12, 2011) (internal quotation marks
 and citation omitted). State v. Ah Choy, 70 Haw. 618, 780 P.2d
 
1097 (1989), is relevant in this regard. In Ah Choy, the
 
defendant was convicted after a jury trial of attempted murder
 
and robbery. Id. at 618-19, 780 P.2d at 1098-99. The defendant
 
28
         
         
          
          
       
       
        
           
   
        
        
  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
filed a motion for a new trial on, inter alia, the ground that
 
the prosecution failed to list an alibi rebuttal witness pursuant
 to HRPP Rule 12.1. Id. at 620, 780 P.2d at 1099. The circuit
 
court denied the motion. On appeal, in pertinent part, the
 defendant argued that the circuit court abused its discretion in
 allowing the prosecution’s witness to rebut the defendant’s alibi
 witness testimony since the prosecution failed to name its
 rebuttal witness before trial. Id. at 623-24, 780 P.2d at 1102­
03. This court decided the error was harmless because the
 
“direct testimony” of the prosecution’s witnesses “overwhelmingly
 contradicted” the defendant’s alibi witness. 
Though we are deeply troubled by the prosecutor’s failure to
abide by our rules of discovery, State v. Davis , 63 Haw.
191, 196-97, 624 P.2d 376, 380 (1981), we cannot ignore the
direct testimony of the store cashier who positively
identified Appellant as her attacker, nor the direct
testimony of the off-duty hotel security guard who saw
Appellant crossing from the hotel . . . . This testimony
identifying Appellant overwhelmingly contradicted
Appellant’s alibi witness . Accordingly, we hold the trial
court’s admission of the rebuttal witness’ harmless error.
 
Id. at 625, 780 P.2d at 1103.
 
Unlike Ah Choy, there was no “direct testimony” that
 
“overwhelmingly contradicted” Defendant’s alibi. As shown supra,
 
although CW and Miller ultimately identified Defendant as CW’s
 assailant, their descriptions to the police contained
 inconsistencies, and Benavides and Defendant testified Defendant
 was elsewhere. The vehicle identified by the police was not tied
 to Defendant, and although a wooden baton was located, it was not
 the instrument used in the incident. 
29
         
            
         ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
The court’s error allowed Santiago’s testimony into
 
evidence wherein he testified that he and Defendant were chasing
 
an individual on Ala Moana Boulevard. Without Santiago’s
 testimony, the investigator’s testimony would not have been
 admissible, inasmuch as the investigator was called upon to
 impeach Santiago.
15 The investigator testified that Santiago said
 
he and Defendant were on Ward Avenue chasing individuals,
 contradicting Defendant’s alibi defense. It follows that the
 admission of Santiago’s testimony had a pivotal role in the case
 and reasonably might have contributed to his conviction. As a
 result, the admission of Santiago’s testimony was not harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt, see Veikoso, 2011 WL 4037979, at *10,
 and thus, the ICA gravely erred when it held that HRPP Rule 12.1
 was not violated.
 
XI.
 
Accordingly, the court’s February 5, 2008 judgment of
 
conviction and sentence of Defendant and the ICA’s June 3, 2011
 judgment are vacated and the case is remanded for a new trial. 
Karen T. Nakasone, Deputy  /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
 /s/ Simeon R. Acoba, Jr.
 /s/ James E. Duffy, Jr.
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
Public Defender for 
petitioner/defendant-appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima, Deputy
Prosecuting Attorney, Cityand County of Honolulu for
respondent/plaintiff-appellee.
 
15
 We do not reach the question of whether it was proper for the
 
court to allow the investigator to testify to “impeach” Santiago.
 
30
 
