                                                                 
                                                                     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***    
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court 
SCWC-11-0000573 17-SEP-2015 
07:45 AM 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Petitioner-Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
 
vs.
 
PATRICK W. DEGUAIR, JR.,
Respondent-Petitioner/Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 
and
 
ARYSS DAYNE K. KAMAI, Respondent-Defendant.
 
SCWC-11-0000573
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
(CAAP-11-0000573; CR. NO. 08-1-0533)
 
SEPTEMBER 17, 2015
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY RECKTENWALD, C.J.
 
This case arises from the murder of Jermaine Duckworth. 
On March 27, 2008, Duckworth’s body was discovered at the foot of 
a cliff on Yokohama Bay, a beach near Ka
'ena Point on the island    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
of O'ahu, Hawai' i. 
On April 9, 2008, Patrick W. Deguair, Jr., was indicted 
for Duckworth’s murder and kidnapping, as well as firearms 
charges and other offenses, as follows: (1) Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707­
701.5 (2014) and 706-656 (2014) (Count I); (2) Kidnapping, in
 violation of HRS §§ 707-720(1)(d) (2014) and/or 707-720(1)(e)
 
1
(2014) (Count II); (3) two counts of Carrying or Use of Firearm
in the Commission of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS
 § 134-21 (2011) (Counts III and IV); (4) Place to Keep Pistol or
 Revolver, in violation of HRS § 134-25 (2011) (Count V); (5)
 Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of
 HRS § 712-1243 (2014) (Count VI); and (6) Unlawful Use of Drug
 Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010) (Count
 VII).
2 Only Counts I through IV are at issue in this appeal.
 
In two separate trials, the State attempted to prove
 
that Deguair was the individual who shot and killed Duckworth. 
The alleged motive was that Deguair suspected Duckworth had made
 statements to police implicating Deguair in a 2007 home robbery. 
The defense’s theory was that Deguair was innocent of all charges
 
1
 Deguair’s alleged offenses were committed on March 27, 2008.
 
Although HRS § 707-720 was subsequently amended during the legislative session
of 2008, the changes do not affect the sections of HRS § 707-720 with which
Deguair was charged.  2008 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 147, § 2 at 391. 
2
 The indictment separately charged co-defendant Aryss Dayne K.
 
Kamai (Kamai) under Counts VIII through X, and Kamai pled guilty to these
counts before Deguair’s first trial. 
2
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
and “the real murderer was David Teo and his friends.” 
Both trials ended in mistrial on the counts now before
 
this court. In the second trial, Deguair was tried on Counts I
 
through IV only. The jury indicated that it could not reach a
 verdict on Counts I, III, and IV, and the circuit court declared
 a mistrial on those counts. Although the jury appeared to reach
 a unanimous verdict of guilty on Count II, the circuit court
 concluded that the jury’s failure to reach a unanimous result on
 a related interrogatory meant that the jury was in fact hung on
 Count II, and so the circuit court declared a mistrial on that
 count as well. The circuit court discharged the jury. 
Later that night, the circuit court concluded that it
 
had erred by not accepting the verdict on Count II. The circuit
 court reconvened the jurors eight days later, questioned them
 regarding their votes, and accepted the guilty verdict as to
 Count II. Shortly thereafter, a juror contacted the circuit
 court regarding possible misconduct by the jurors during the
 trial. After questioning all twelve jurors, the circuit court
 determined that the jury deliberations had been tainted by juror
 misconduct. 
The circuit court granted Deguair’s motion to dismiss
 
Counts I, III, and IV under State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647
 P.2d 705 (1982). The circuit court also granted Deguair’s motion
 to vacate Count II based on the juror misconduct but denied his
 motions to dismiss Count II under Moriwake. Instead, the circuit
 
3
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
court ordered a retrial on Count II. In addition, the circuit
 
court rejected Deguair’s objections to recalling the jury. 
On appeal, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA)
 
affirmed the circuit court’s orders on Counts I through IV. The
 ICA explicitly stated it did not need to address whether the
 circuit court erred in recalling the jury because the circuit
 court had vacated the conviction on Count II.
 
Both the State and Deguair applied for certiorari. The
 
State argues that the ICA erred in concluding that the circuit
 court did not abuse its discretion by granting Deguair’s motion
 to dismiss Counts I, III, and IV. 
Deguair argues that the ICA erred in ruling that a
 
retrial on Count II was not barred by double jeopardy, and in
 failing to address whether the trial court erred in recalling the
 jury. 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm the judgment
 
of the ICA.
 
I. Background
 
A. First trial proceedings
 
This case first proceeded to jury trial before the
 
circuit court in October 2009.
3 The first trial lasted eight and
 
one-half days, and after jury deliberations of seven days, the
 circuit court entered a finding of “manifest necessity” and
 
3
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
4
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
declared a mistrial as to Counts I through V because the jury
 
could not reach a unanimous verdict. There were no objections
 from either counsel. It is undisputed that the jurors in the
 first trial were evenly split on Counts I through IV, with six
 jurors voting “not guilty” and six jurors voting “guilty” on each
 count. 
The jury also returned verdicts acquitting Deguair on
 
Counts VI and VII, and the circuit court later granted the
 State’s motion for nolle prosequi without prejudice as to Count
 V. The circuit court also denied Deguair’s first motion to
 
dismiss the indictment as to Counts I through IV. Therefore,
 Counts I through IV remained.
 
B. Second trial proceedings
 
The second trial, which is presently at issue,
 
commenced on March 7, 2011.
4 The presentation of evidence began
 
on March 10, 2011, and continued for eight days. The evidence
 
from the second trial was substantially similar to the evidence
 from the first trial, except that Ju Wong Woo and Duckworth’s
 
5
brother, James Duckworth,  testified at the second trial only. 
Teo and Woo were the State’s key witnesses. Deguair also
 testified. 
Teo testified that around midnight on March 27, 2008,
 
4
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
5
 James testified that Deguair accused Duckworth of implicating
 
Deguair in a 2007 home robbery.  James also testified that Deguair had twice
 
threatened him and Duckworth. 
5
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
he saw Deguair bring Duckworth to a sport utility vehicle (SUV)
 
and that Duckworth’s mouth was covered with duct tape, and his
 arms were taped behind his back. When they arrived at Yokohama
 Bay, Teo heard Woo tell Deguair to shoot Duckworth. Teo
 testified that he saw Deguair shoot Duckworth and kick him off
 the cliff, all without untaping Duckworth. 
Woo testified that he did not tell Deguair to shoot
 
Duckworth, but that he saw Deguair point a gun at Duckworth’s
 head and heard a gunshot, though he looked away before the gun
 fired. Woo also testified that Deguair did all of this without
 untaping Duckworth. 
Deguair testified that he taped Duckworth at the
 
direction of Teo, and that he untaped Duckworth before putting
 him in the back of the SUV. Deguair testified that he drove
 until Teo told him to pull over in Nânâ kuli, and that Teo walked
 
off with Duckworth, leaving Deguair and Woo at the SUV. Deguair
 testified that more than an hour later, Teo returned alone. The
 apparent implication of this testimony was that Teo murdered
 Duckworth.
 
Duckworth’s body was discovered that day by a
 
lifeguard, who testified there was no duct tape on Duckworth’s
 body. The photographs taken of Duckworth’s body at Yokohama Bay,
 which were received into evidence, did not show any tape on
 Duckworth’s body. In addition, the doctor who conducted an
 autopsy of Duckworth’s body found adhesive residue on Duckworth’s
 
6
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
arms and hand. Three additional witnesses testified that Deguair
 
taped Duckworth. 
Jury deliberations began on March 31, 2011, and
 
continued for two and one-half days. On April 5, 2011, the jury
 notified the circuit court via “Communication No. 4 from the
 Jury” that it was “unable to come to a unanimous decision on
 Counts 1, 3, and 4, and is unlikely to do so.” The circuit
 court, with concurrence of both counsel, responded by asking
 whether more time would assist the jury in reaching a unanimous
 verdict on Counts I, III, and IV. The jury responded in
 “Communication No. 5 from the Jury” that “[n]o, the jury has
 unanimously decided that more time will not help.” 
In “Communication No. 6 from the Jury,” the jury asked,
 
“[c]an the jury submit its verdict for Count #2 even though it is
 not unanimous on the interrogatory questions?” The circuit
 court, with concurrence of both counsel, answered:
 
If the interrogatory questions you are referring
to are the questions on page 32[6] of the jury
 
6 Page 32 of the jury instructions states:
 
If you find that the prosecution has proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant committed
the offense of Kidnapping, then you must also answer
the following three questions on a special
interrogatory which will be provided to you:
 1.	 Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonab le
 
doubt that prior to trial the Defendant did not
release Jermaine Duckworth voluntarily?
 2.	 Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that prior to trial the Defendant did not
release Jermaine Duckworth alive and not
 
(continued...)
 
7
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
instructions, then you may not return a verdict on
Count 2.  
If, however, the interrogatory questions you are
referring to are not those on page 32, then please
advise the court exactly what interrogatory questions
you are referring to.
 
The circuit court reconvened with the parties outside
 
of the presence of the jury. The circuit court reviewed the jury
 
communications it had received thus far, including Communication
 Nos. 4, 5, and 6, and the circuit court’s responses. At the
 close of this discussion, the circuit court explicitly asked both
 
6(...continued)
suffe
ring from serious or substantial bodily
injury?
 3.	 Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that prior to trial the Defendant did not
release Jermaine Duckworth in a safe place?
 
Your [sic] must answer each of these questions
separately.  Your answer to each of these questions
must be unanimous.
 
Though not included in the jury instructions, HRS § 707-720(1)
provides, in pertinent part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of kidnapping if the
person intentionally or knowingly restrains another
person with intent to:
 
. . .
 (d) Inflict bodily injury upon that person or subject
that person to a sexual offense;
 
(e) Terrorize that person or a third person
 . . . . 
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony.
 
(3) In a prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense
which reduces the offense to a class B felony that the
defendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and
not suffering from serious or substantial bodily
injury, in a safe place prior to trial.
 
(Emphases added).
 
8
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
counsel if they had “anything for the record on anything the
 
court just put on the record?” Both counsel stated that they had
 nothing further for the record. 
In “Communication No. 7 from the Jury,” the jury
 
stated, “Re. Communication #6, the jury is not unanimous on
 Question #2 on p. 32 . . . .” The circuit court again reconvened
 with counsel outside the presence of the jury. The circuit court
 stated:
 
[s]o they are not unanimous on all three of the
questions on page 32, as they have to be to return a
verdict
. So basically, no matter what they did with
that verdict form,  the court will not be accepting a
verdi
ct on Count number II
. The upshot of that is 
it
looks like they’re hung on all four counts
essentially.  It’s going to be a mistrial declared on
all counts again.  
(Emphases added). 
The Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) indicated the
 
State was ready for the circuit court to bring in the jurors. 
Defense counsel, however, questioned whether and how
 
the jurors’ votes would be determined.
 
MR. HUNT:  Your Honor, are we going to be able to
deter
mine from the record where they stand?
 
THE COURT:  
I’m going to go in and talk to them right
after we finish.
 
MR. HUNT: 
 Because I think it would be-­
THE COURT:  
I’m going to go and talk to them right
after we finish because I need to get that at least
from 
them.  And I-­
MR. HUNT:  Than
k you. 
THE COURT:  I n
ormally talk to them anyway.  And then 
you k
now the rules, counsel.  I mean you can talk to
them 
if you want to afterwards . I’m not going to make
 
them wait around though.
 
9
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
MR. HUNT:  Are you going to ask them where they-­
THE COURT:  Well, I’ll just-­
MR. HUNT:  --numerically stand? 
THE COURT:  I’l
l just tell them sometimes the
attorneys like to talk to the jurors.  You can talk to
 
them if you want to, and I’m going to leave it up to
you.
 
MR. HUNT:  As far as where they stood numerically?
 
THE COURT:  Oh, no.  No, that, I’m going to ask
 
specifically.
 
MR. HUNT:  You’re going to ask.  Okay, that would be
 
fine.  I’d appreciate that.
 
THE C
OURT:  That, I’m going to ask them specifically. 
Obviously, I think it’s germane.  And I’ll report it
 
to both of you, too.  As soon as I find out, I’ll let
 you know.
 
(Emphases added). 
The DPA raised concerns about his availability to speak
 
with the jurors.
 
MR. BELL:  I’d like to just inform the court that
after
 the verdict--well, after the decision is
received and the court makes the appropriate findings
and makes its declaration and we take care of other
 procedural matters, I do have another matter before
another court at 3 o’clock, and I don’t want to keep
that other court waiting.  I just say that because if
it was the defense [sic] intention to speak with the
jurors after the court has concluded its conversation
with them, I cannot say that I would be immediately
available and ready to do so.  I say that because I’m
going to be in another courtroom.  But if it is the
 defense intention to speak with the jurors, if they
choose to do so before they disperse, then I’ll stay
and-­
THE C
OURT:  Well, you guys work that out, because as
you know, you can talk to them--both counsel don’t
have to be there.  You can call them up days later if
they’re willing to speak to you, I mean, you know,
because the rules had changed a long time ago on all
of that, and I think you’re both aware of the ethical
rules as far as that goes.  So that, you need to work
 out among yourselves . I will tell you this.  I am not
 
going to have them stay in the jury room and bring one
or both of you in.  I’m going to talk to them, and
then I’m going to release them.  And then it’s up to
you, I mean if you want to wait in the hall there,
 
10
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
catch them as they come out or something.  Whatever
 
you guys want to do is up to you, but I’m just going
to leave that to you all, okay?
 
Okay, bring them in.
 
(Emphases added).
 
After the jurors were called into the courtroom, the
 
foreperson confirmed that the jury was “unable to reach a
 
unanimous verdict as to Counts I, III, and IV” and that “more
 time would not help the jury to reach a unanimous decision on
 those counts.” 
With respect to Count II, the foreperson handed to the
 
bailiff what the jurors “believe[d] to be” their verdict, noting,
 “[w]hether or not it would be accepted or not is the question.” 
The circuit court called both counsel to the bench,
 
where the following discussion occurred outside the presence of
 the jury: 
THE COURT:  Everything else except those three is
blank
, as it should be, because they were unable to
reach unanimous verdicts.  I’m showing counsel--for
the record, I’m showing counsel the three verdict
forms that the jury did fill out.  They are Count II,
kidnapping, the interrogatories for Count II, and also
the interrogatory on the enhanced sentencing for use
of a firearm for Count II.
 
For the record, they returned a verdict of
guilty on Count II.  However--and I will clarify this
with them in a second--they checked off 1 and 3 “Yes”
on the interrogatories but just made dashes in number
2 along with their last jury communication.  And I
 will confirm that, for the record, that means they
were not unanimous on that question. 
 And the interrog
as to firearms kind of is moot, but they were not
unanimous as to that one either.
 
So what I intend to do for the record is to
 
clarify that, in fact, they were not able to reach
unanimous answer as to question number 2 of the three
interrogatories pertaining to kidnapping and that, in
fact, they were not able to reach a unanimous verdict
 
11
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
as to
 the use--well, possession of a firearm or
semiautomatic firearm.  And given that, I am not going
to receive the verdict as to Count II.  That’s the
 
court
’s intention.
 
Mr. Bell.
 
MR. B
ELL:  I understand that, Your Honor.  I’d ask the
 
court to consider the following.  What the court has
 
presented is what the parties, I believe, inferred
what was going to transpire.  For the purpose of
establishing kidnapping as a class A, the prosecution
only has to establish one of those three has been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  Before they reach
the interrogatories, they have to establish as a
matter of fact that the defendant knowingly or
intentionally restrained Jermaine, and then there’s
those two alternatives.  Only after they’ve made a
unanimous finding as to the two counts of kidnapping-­two elements of kidnapping do they consider the
interrogatories.
 
So the prosecution is asking the court to
consider this.  Inasmuch as they’ve already reached a
verdict as to the kidnapping as charged, questions of
fact, and they do not reach the interrogatories until
they made those findings and because they found at
least as to one question a unanimous verdict as to
yes, then there is a factual basis for the court to
receive that verdict as to kidnapping as a class A
felony. 
THE C
OURT:  Mr. Hunt. 
MR. HUNT: 
again
.  Your
 Honor, can I see the verdict form 
No, I disagree.   I agree with the court’s
 
position.
 
THE COURT: 
 Okay, you made your record on that-­
MR. BELL: 
 Thank you.
 
THE COURT: 
 --Mr. Bell.  I bel
ieve all three questions
have to be answered unanimously in the affirmative,
and they’re simply not.  I think that’s required under
the applicable statutes as contained in the Penal
Code.  So as I say, you’ve made your record. I’m
 respectfully not going to accept the verdict on Count
number II, and I’m going to declare a mistrial due to
manifest necessity on all four counts.
 
MR. BELL: 
 I understand, Your Honor.
 
Just 
on the last point, is the court’s reading
of 707-720 that each of the three questions have to be
answered in the affirmative?  Is that what the court
 just said?  I thought--I mean the law is one of the
 
12
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
three, not all three.  That’s just the prosecution’s
 
perspective.  I just want to understand–­
THE C
OURT:  No-­
MR. BELL:  --what the court said. 
THE COURT:  --I’m not going to commit myself to ananswer on that.  I am saying that on the verdict form
which the jury was provided with, the clear
instructions to them is that the answer to each of
 these questions must be unanimous, and one of them was
not.  So, you know, I suppose you can file a writ
seriously if you feel strongly enough about it.  And
 if the appellate--the Supreme Court agreed with you,
then maybe you could reinstate--maybe they would
reinstate the verdict in Count II.  After all, the
verdict is in unambiguously, and it’ll be preserved
for the record.  But at this point, I’m going to
declare a mistrial.  I’m not going to accept the
 verdict.  I’m going to declare a mistrial on Count II
as well as the other three counts, and we’ll take it
from there.
 
MR. BELL:
 Thank you.
 
(Emphases added).
 
In the presence of the jury, the circuit court further
 
discussed with the foreperson the verdict form on Count II. 
THE COURT:  Okay . . . just so the record is very
clear
, on the verdict form containing the three
interrogatories pertaining to Count II, the “Yes” box
is checked off very clearly and unequivocally on
questions 1 and 3.  However, question number 2, there
are just a couple of dash marks after both “Yes” and
“No.”  And 
my understanding based on your
commu
nication to the court on this issue is that the
 
jury was unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to
question 2, is that correct?
 
THE FOREPERSON:  Cor
rect.
 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  
All right.  Well, in that case, then, I’m
not g
oing to receive the verdict as to Count II.  And
 
because the jury has informed the court and all of us
on the record just now that, despite their efforts,
they’re unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to
Counts I, III, and IV, I’m going to find manifest
necessity, and I’m declaring a mistrial as to all four
counts in this case, Counts I, II, III, and IV. 
(Emphases added).
 
13
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Thus, the circuit court did not accept the jury’s
 
guilty verdict as to Count II, and declared a mistrial based upon
 
“manifest necessity” on all four counts. There were no
 objections made by either counsel, and both counsel indicated
 they had nothing further for the record. Because the circuit
 court did not accept the verdict as to Count II, the circuit
 
7
court did not poll  the jury with respect to Count II at that
time. 
The circuit court indicated it would meet with the
 
jurors in the jury room, and twice stated that the jury was
 “discharged.” 
The circuit court did not instruct jurors to
 
refrain from discussing the case with others or that they could
 potentially be recalled. 
The circuit court then scheduled a retrial, and there
 
were no objections made by either counsel. 
C. Jury recall and misconduct proceedings
 
Later that night, the circuit court concluded that it
 
had erred in not accepting the guilty verdict on Count II. The
 
circuit court contacted counsel and “start[ed] gathering jurors
 
7
 Under Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 31© (2015), “Poll of 
Jury,” 
[w]hen a verdict is returned and before it is
recorded, the jury shall be polled at the request of
any party or upon the court’s own motion.  If upon the
poll there is not unanimous concurrence, or there is
not concurrence by the number of jurors stipulated to
as being necessary for returning a verdict, the jury
may be directed to retire for further deliberations or
may be discharged.
 
14
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
up” for recall. There is no evidence in the record that the
 
circuit court informed the jurors that they were not to discuss
 the case with others. Due to “unavailability of counsel because
 of prior commitments,” the circuit court was unable to meet with
 counsel regarding this issue until April 7, 2011, which was two
 days after discharging the jury. 
At the April 7, 2011 chambers conference, the circuit
 
court informed counsel that it believed it had made a mistake by
 not accepting the jury’s verdict on Count II because the jurors
 were required to vote unanimously in the affirmative on only one
 of the three interrogatory questions on the verdict form to
 submit a guilty verdict on Count II as a class A felony. The
 circuit court also indicated its intention to “gather the jury
 members, go back on record and poll them, and then depending on
 the results of the poll, proceed from there.” The circuit court
 scheduled the proceeding for April 13, 2011, and invited counsel
 to “file anything respective counsel wanted to on this issue.” 
The circuit court contacted all of the jurors, who “were all
 amenable to coming back at this day and time.” 
Deguair’s objections to the circuit court’s recall of
 
the jury for the purposes of polling (Objections to Recall and
 Polling) were filed on April 11, 2011. The State responded to
 Deguair’s objections. 
Without ruling on Deguair’s Objections to the Recall
 
and Polling, the circuit court reconvened the jury on April 13,
 
15
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2011. Before the jurors were called into the courtroom, the
 
circuit court stated that on April 5, 2011, the jurors were
 “deadlocked six to six” on Counts I, III, and IV. 
The DPA asked:
 
[W]ill [t]he Court be open to confirming that on
April 5, 2011, after the jury was discharged, that
this Court, in fact, did speak with the jurors in the
jury room, as it indicated that it was going to do so,
and during that conversation, the Court was able to
determine where the jurors stood on all counts,
including Count 2?  Will the Court confirm that?
 
The circuit court answered, “[n]o, because I think
 
that’s tantamount to making myself a witness in this case, and
 
I’m not going to do that.” 
Defense counsel raised concerns about the jurors’
 
potential exposure to “publicity” regarding the case.
 
MR. HUNT:  And my concern is since the jury was
discharged almost ten days ago, you know, eight or
nine days ago, there has been publicity.  I did attach
 
as an Exhibit A to my memo the fact that there was
publicity, and there was a notation that there was an
earlier murder.  I think, it was in 2002 that Mr.
DeGuair [sic] was a suspect in but was not prosecuted
because there were no witnesses to testify and so
forth.  So, I’m concerned that the jury has had
extraneous influence now that–­
THE COURT:  Potentially.
 
MR. HUNT:  
Yes, yes.  After-­
THE COURT: 
 I mean, you know, just--we don’t know in
fact that any of them-­
MR. HUNT:
  True.
 
THE COURT: 
--that’s all I’m saying.
 
Go on
. 
MR. HUNT: 
 And I agree with the Court.  We don’t know
 
unless we ask.  And, I suppose, to be careful, I
think
, we should probably do some inquiry--at least,
I’m making that request--what the jury has since
exposed themselves to since being discharged, whether
 
16
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
they’ve gone on the internet and read newspapers and
looked up the case and things.   But, the bottom line
is, with all due respect, I think the Court, once it
discharged the jury, lost the power to call it back
and ask it to poll--to poll it and to render a true
verdict.
 
THE COURT:
 No.  Certainly, I understand your point. 
And as I say, in the fullness of time, you may bevindicated.  I, frankly, am not sure.  I would note just, sort of, parenthetically that, again, I don'tknow whether--how much water this will carry or, forexample, how much it would make a difference to anappellate court looking at this.  
But, I would, like I
said, note parenthetically that, you know, your clientand defendants in his position have a right to a jurypoll under the Hawai 'i rules of penal procedure.  It’s 
not a constitutional right. 
MR. HUNT: 
Correct.
 
(Emphases added).
 
The circuit court, again over defense counsel’s
 
objection, questioned the jury as to whether they agreed with the
 
guilty verdict on Count II and Interrogatory Nos. 1 and 3
 relating to Count II. Each juror answered in the affirmative. 
The circuit court also asked the jurors whether their responses
 would have been the same if the circuit court had asked for their
 numerical split on April 5, 2011. The jurors answered in the
 affirmative. The circuit court did not ask the jurors whether
 they had been exposed to publicity or discussed the case with
 others. The circuit court accepted the jury’s verdict on Count
 II and adjudged Deguair guilty of kidnapping as a Class A felony. 
Later that day, on April 13, 2011, the circuit court
 
received a telephone voice mail message from Juror No. 4. The
 message stated the following:
 
[JUROR 4]:   I was in the jury of Patrick Deguair
trial
, No. 4.  Um, I had some concerns, and I was–I
 
17
    
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
didn’t know who to talk to.  And it probably happens
 
all t
he time.
 
But I real
ly--during deliberation, I really
suspected that people looked at the Internet ‘cause
things came out that weren’t in trial, and it really
bothers me.  And I think some--and I think there was a
 fear factor for some of these jurors.  
And if you’re going to retry this, somehow--you
know, you’re not--it’s going to come out the same way
because people are going to be too scared.  It’s too
 small of an island.  I know you--you didn’t have that
--you tried to put that fear out of our heads, but I-­I have a concern.
 
I don’t know, um--I don’t know what you can do
about it except sequester, but I think that people
did--did just go right on and looked and found out
stuff.
 
The circuit court reconvened to question Juror No. 4 on
 
8
April 15, 2011. Juror No. 4 testified that Juror No. 1  said
“she was not going to get up in open court and say guilty.” 
Juror No. 4 also reported three instances of possible juror
 misconduct: 
(1) statements made by Juror No. 1 during
 
deliberation of the jury that there was “documented evidence”
 that Deguair had threatened four people, suggesting that Juror
 
9
; (2) mention
 No. 1 had consulted outside sources of information 
of the name of a “Samoan gang” that may have been involved, which
 Juror No. 4 claimed had not come to light during the trial; and
 (3)
 Juror No. 1 had conducted her own experiment by putting duct
 
tape on her forearm to see if it left residue marks, the result
 of which experiment Juror No. 1 reported to other jurors. 
The other jurors were subsequently questioned
 
8
 Juror No. 1 served as the foreperson.
 
9
 Juror No. 1 later testified that she did not make this statement.
 
18
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
individually. Five other jurors corroborated Juror No. 4’s
 
testimony that Juror No. 1 had said that she would not say
 Deguair was guilty in open court. 
Juror No. 1 confirmed that she had been concerned about
 
gang membership and being the target of retaliation. When the
 circuit court asked about the jurors’ “fear of being on a hit
 list” and “the mention of Samoan gangs,” Juror No. 1 explained:
 
A ... [W]ell, it’s probably because people--people
have 
told us or we’ve seen on TV where you’re--if
you’re the identifiable person, the foreperson, that
maybe there’s repercussions after.  And so people were
 afraid.
 
Q 
Were they afraid that they might be killed or
murdered by someone associated with a Samoan gang?
 
A 
Well, those words didn’t really come up, but it
was just you’d get attacked or, you know, targeted. 
So when we started picking our foreperson, one person
specifically said, I absolutely do not, cannot, don’t
want to be it for these reasons.  And then I even
 said, Okay, me too.  For that reason, I don’t want to
 do it.  And so it kind of--how the discussion went. 
And then we ended up doing it randomly.  So we picked
 numbers out of a bag.
 
Five other jurors recalled hearing statements regarding
 
fear of reprisal should the jury find Deguair guilty and the
 
consequences of being the foreperson. 
Regarding the duct tape experiment, Juror No. 1
 
testified that, after the first day of deliberations, “I wanted
 to validate the residue part of the evidence that was in the
 picture, how that would happen. So I took tape and I stuck it on
 my forearm and waited ten minutes and then pulled it off, and
 that was it.” 
Further, Juror Nos. 4 and 8 confirmed that after the
 
19
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
jury was discharged but before the jury was recalled, they did
 
research Deguair on the internet. Juror No. 4 testified that she
 found Deguair had allegedly threatened other people in the past. 
Juror No. 8 testified that she found Deguair had supposedly
 murdered someone else. 
D. Post-trial motions
 
Two separate motions by Deguair were filed in the
 
circuit court on April 28, 2011. Both motions are at issue on
 
certiorari. First, Deguair moved to dismiss Counts I through IV
 with prejudice (Second Motion to Dismiss) based on the factors
 set forth in State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 56-57, 647 P.2d 705,
 712-13 (1982). Deguair argued that five of the six Moriwake
 factors weighed against retrial, while the “severity of the
 offense charged” did not weigh against retrial. Deguair further
 submitted that if the circuit court were to grant his motion to
 vacate the conviction on Count II, it should also dismiss Count
 II with prejudice, rather than grant a new trial on Count II
 because the evidence that the State would lawfully be permitted
 to present in a third trial on Count II would be “substantially
 restricted” by the dismissals of Counts I, III, and IV. 
Deguair’s counsel also argued:
 
On April 7, 2011, the Court held a chambers conference
with counsel for the parties and informed the parties
that the Court believed it made a mistake by not
accepting the jury’s verdict on count II because the
jury only needed to be unanimous on one of the three
questions on the verdict form in order for the Court
to accept the jury’s verdict on count II as a class A
felony, and over defendant’s objection decided to
 
20
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
reconvene the jury on April 13, 2011, to accept the
jury’s verdict on count II and poll the jury.  The
 Court also informed counsel in chambers that it met
 with the jury for approximately and [sic] hour to an
hour and a half after discharging the jury to answer
questions from jurors and determine where the jurors
stood on the deadlocked counts.  The Court informed
 counsel the jurors were evenly split, six for guilty
and six for not guilty on counts I, III and IV.
 
In opposition, the State argued that five of the six
 
Moriwake factors weighed in favor of retrial.   The State did not
 
dispute defense counsel’s statement that the jury was evenly
 
split, six-to-six. Indeed, the State represented that on
 April 6, 2011, “the State received a phone call from the court’s
 law clerk/bailiff, who informed the State of the jury’s vote as
 to each count, including the kidnapping special interrogatories.” 
In a footnote, the State represented, “[i]t is the State’s
 understanding that, as to counts 1, 3 and 4, the jury was split
 evenly at 6/6.”
 
Second, Deguair moved to vacate the conviction on Count
 
II and dismiss Count II with prejudice (Motion to Vacate and
 Dismiss Count II) based on the juror misconduct. Deguair
 requested that the circuit court dismiss Count II under 
Moriwake ,
 
rather than grant a new trial. Deguair argued:
 
[E]ven standing alone each of the improper instances
of jury behavior described above warrant vacating the
kidnapping conviction and granting a new trial on the
kidnapping count.  Defendant further submits, however,
that the collective effect of the jury’s improper
conduct makes it impossible for the State to prove
that the jurors’ misconduct was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.  Defendant was clearly denied a
trial by a fair and impartial jury on the kidnapping
charge and the only fair and just result should be
that kidnapping conviction be vacated, and rather than
granting a new trial, Count 2 must be dismissed with
prejudice, based on State v. Moriwake  . . . .
 
21
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(Citation omitted). 
In other words, Deguair appeared to argue that juror
 
misconduct prejudiced the jury’s deliberations as to Count II,
 
but that because the circuit court should not have recalled the
 jury to receive a guilty verdict on Count II, the circuit court
 should dismiss Count II under Moriwake as if the jury were
 deadlocked on Count II. 
In opposition, the State argued (1) there was no
 
“concrete evidence” that Juror No. 1 obtained information from
 outside the trial; (2) the comments regarding the threats and
 Samoan gangs did not prejudice Deguair; (3) Juror No. 1’s duct
 tape experiment did not prejudice Deguair because whether there
 was adhesive residue on Duckworth’s body was irrelevant to the
 kidnapping; and (4) Moriwake did not apply to Count II because
 the jury was not deadlocked on Count II.
 
The circuit court held a hearing on both motions on
 
May 18, 2011. The circuit court first addressed and heard
 arguments regarding the Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II. 
The circuit court orally granted the motion to vacate the
 conviction on Count II, but denied the motion as to dismissal of
 Count II, stating “[t]he proper remedy is a new trial, and that’s
 what I’m ordering.”
 
As to the Second Motion to Dismiss, the circuit court
 
stated, “it’s the Court’s considered judgment that the chances of
 the State persuading 12 jurors unanimously to find the defendant
 
22
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
guilty as charged of Counts 1 and 3 and 4 are virtually nil.” 
The circuit court orally granted Deguair’s Second Motion to
 Dismiss. At the hearing, the State did not dispute or put on
 contradictory evidence that the second jury was deadlocked six-
to-six.
 
On July 1, 2011, the circuit court entered two separate
 
orders on the motions that confirmed its oral rulings. The
 circuit court granted in part the Second Motion to Dismiss with
 respect to Counts I, III, and IV, and denied in part the Second
 Motion to Dismiss with respect to Count II (Second Dismissal
 Order). The circuit court also granted Deguair’s request to
 vacate his conviction on Count II but denied his request to
 dismiss Count II with prejudice pursuant to Moriwake (Order re
 Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II). The Second Dismissal
 Order and Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II
 contained findings of fact and conclusions of law, which are
 discussed as relevant below.
 
The circuit court denied and overruled Deguair’s
 
Objections to Recall and Polling (Order re Recall and Polling) in
 an order entered on August 26, 2011.
 
E. ICA proceedings
 
In the ICA, the State appealed the Second Dismissal
 
Order, and on cross-appeal, Deguair appealed the Order re Motion
 
to Vacate and Dismiss Count II and the Order re Recall and
 Polling.
 
23
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In its July 31, 2014 Summary Disposition Order (SDO),
 
the ICA affirmed the Second Dismissal Order and Order re Motion
 
to Vacate and Dismiss Count II. Because the circuit court
 vacated the conviction on Count II, the ICA did not address the
 circuit court’s recall of the jury.
 
With respect to the State’s appeal, the ICA held:
 
[t]he Circuit Court carefully considered and weighed
each of the Moriwake  factors in light of all of the
particular circumstances of this case, including the
juror misconduct in the second trial, and the
seriousness and potential impact of that misconduct on
the deliberations of the second hung jury. 
Notwithstanding the State’s challenges to certain
aspects of the FOFs and COLs, on the whole of this
record, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court
abused its discretion in concluding that the public’s
interest and the defendant’s interest in fundamental
 fairness would not be served by conducting a third
trial on Counts I, III, and IV.
 
With respect to Deguair’s cross-appeal, the ICA held:
 
Assuming, arguendo , that the Circuit Court erred
in recalling the discharged jury and belatedly
accepting the guilty verdict on Count II (including
any errors related to jury polling), presumably the
Circuit Court should have allowed the erroneous
 declaration of a mistrial to stand, notwithstanding
the court’s error in initially rejecting the verdict. 
As implicitly acknowledged in Deguair’s alternative
prayer for relief in this appeal, the appropriate
proceeding would then have been a hearing on a motion
to dismiss based on Moriwake.  However, that is
precisely what happened in this case, albeit with the
added complications and considerations stemming from
the juror misconduct, which were addressed in
Deguair’s separate motion for relief.  Deguair’s
second motion to dismiss the indictment, which was
filed on April 28, 2011, specifically argued that,
applying the Moriwake factors to this case, Deguair
should not be subjected to a third trial on any of the
four remaining counts, with particularized arguments
concerning Count II.  Deguair does not argue on appeal
that the Circuit Court erred in any aspect of its
Moriwake analysis.
 
Instead, Deguair argues that the dismissal of
Count II based on the juror misconduct was not based
on “manifest necessity,” and therefore retrial would
be barred by double jeopardy.  This argument is
 
24
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
without merit.  As Deguair himself argued in his
motion to vacate the conviction on Count II and
 dismiss it with prejudice, which was also filed on
April 28, 2011, “the improper instances of jury
behavior described above warrant vacating the
kidnapping conviction and granting a new trial on the
kidnapping count.”  In essence, Deguair argued that it
was a manifest necessity to vacate the conviction on
Count II, which the Circuit Court then did.  In the
 Circuit Court proceedings, Deguair further argued in
the motion to vacate that, “rather than granting a new
trial, Count 2 must be dismissed with prejudice, based
on State v. Moriwake , 65 Haw. 47 (1982),” and he
incorporated by reference the Moriwake arguments made
in his second motion to dismiss indictment, which was
filed concurrently therewith.  As stated above,
Deguair does not argue on appeal that the Circuit
Court erred in its Moriwake analysis.
 
(Emphasis in original).
 
In other words, the ICA appeared to conclude that there
 
was manifest necessity to declare a mistrial because of the juror
 
misconduct and that Deguair waived his ability to challenge the
 circuit court’s purported analysis of Count II under Moriwake. 
The ICA entered a judgment on appeal pursuant to its
 
July 31, 2014 SDO on October 24, 2014.
 
Both parties timely sought certiorari review. 
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Motion to dismiss indictment
 
This court has held:
 
A trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss an
indictment is reviewed for an abuse of discretion.
 The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant.  The burden of
 establishing abuse of discretion is on appellant, and
a strong showing is required to establish it.
 
State v. Hinton, 120 Hawai' i 265, 273, 204 P.3d 484, 492 (2009) 
25
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
B.	 Double jeopardy
 
Whether dismissal of a criminal charge is required
 
under double jeopardy is “a question of constitutional law that
 
we review under the right/wrong standard of review.” State v.
 
Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 8, 15, 904 P.2d 893, 900 (1995). 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The State’s Application
 
On certiorari, the State presents the following
 
question:
 
Whether the ICA committed grave errors of law and fact
in concluding that Petitioner failed to demonstrate
the court abused its discretion in its application of
the Moriwake factors and by granting Respondent’s
motion to dismiss with prejudice the murder and two
gun related charges (counts I, III, and IV).
 
(Internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
We hold that the ICA correctly concluded that the
 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in its application of
 
the Moriwake factors and by granting Deguair’s motion to dismiss
 
Counts I, III, and IV. 
1.	 The State’s argument that the jury was not genuinely
deadlocked fails
 
The State argues that the record lacks “undisputed”
 
evidence that the second jury was hung with six jurors voting
 
“guilty” and six jurors voting “not guilty” on Counts I, III, and
 IV. 	The State challenges the circuit court’s findings of fact to
 
26
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the extent that they “recite and rely” on the jury’s purported
 
six-to-six split.
 
The State notes that at the April 13, 2011 hearing, the
 
circuit court would not confirm where the jurors stood on all
 counts when it met with the jurors after the close of trial on
 April 5, 2011, and therefore, it is “unconfirmed” where the jury
 
stood on Counts I, III, and IV.  The State also contends that the
 
court “perhaps improperly, made itself a critical witness” by
 
“meeting privately with the jurors . . . and purportedly
 receiving the only information regarding the jury’s split.” The
 State further notes, “there does not appear to be any evidence in
 the record that all 12 jurors met with the trial court” and that
 those who attended the meeting could have been “reluctant” to
 reveal their verdicts or “confused” because the circuit court
 instructed the jury, before it began deliberating, as follows: 
You must not discuss this case with any person other
than your fellow jurors.  You must not reveal to the
 Court or to any other person how the jury stands
numerically or otherwise until you have reached a
unanimous verdict and it has been received by the
Court.
 
Although the State now argues that the six-to-six split
 
was not “undisputed,” the State conceded in its response to
 
Deguair’s Second Motion to Dismiss in the circuit court that “as
 to counts 1, 3 and 4, the jury was split evenly at 6/6.” In
 addition, after the jury was discharged, the State could have but
 did not ask the jurors where they stood on Counts I, III, and
 
27
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
IV.10 Moreover, the State did not object to the circuit court’s
 
plan to speak to the jurors without counsel present.
 
The State next contends that “the fear and intimidation
 
that weighed constantly on the jurors’ minds” further supports a
 
conclusion that the jury was not “genuinely deadlocked.” The
 State also notes the following: a statement made by a
 prospective juror regarding his concerns about being identifiable
 as a juror; a statement that Deguair “unexpectedly” made at trial
 that “could have intimidated the jurors”; Juror No. 4’s voice
 mail message to the circuit court regarding a “fear factor for
 some of the jurors”; Juror No. 4’s corroborated statement that
 Juror No. 1 said “she was not going to get up in open court and
 say guilty”; and statements made by jurors regarding “the fear of
 being on a hit list,” the “mention of Samoan gangs,” and the
 
perceived consequences of being the foreperson.  The State also
 
argued that the multiple instances of juror misconduct undermine
 
10 Under the Hawai 'i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 
3.5(e)(4)(i) (2015), a lawyer may communicate with the jurors after the jury
has been dismissed,
 
upon leave of the court, which leave shall be freely
granted, a lawyer may ask questions of, or respond to
questions from, jurors about the trial, provided that
the lawyer does so in a manner that is not calculated
to harass or embarrass any juror and does not seek to
influence the juror’s actions in future jury service
in any particular case . . . .
 
Before discharging the jury, the circuit informed both counsel that
after the jury was discharged, they could talk to the jurors to ask them where
they stood. 
28
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the circuit court’s conclusion that the jury deliberations and
 
circumstances of the deliberations weigh “only slightly” for
 allowance of a retrial.
 
The State’s arguments regarding the “fear and
 
intimidation that weighed constantly on the jurors’ minds” and
 the juror misconduct fail because in its opposition in the
 circuit court to Deguair’s Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II,
 the State argued that the statements regarding the Samoan gang
 
affiliation and the juror misconduct were not prejudicial.  In
 
other words, the State argued that the jury’s fear of retaliation
 
from Samoan gangs and juror misconduct did not prejudice jury
 deliberations with respect to the kidnapping charge, while now
 arguing that the fear and misconduct did prejudice jury
 deliberations with respect to the murder and firearm charges that
 it now asks this court for the opportunity to retry. See Roxas
 
v. Marcos, 89 Hawai' i 91, 124, 969 P.2d 1209, 1242 (1998) 
(“Pursuant to the doctrine of judicial estoppel, [a] party will not be permitted to maintain inconsistent positions or to take a position in regard to a matter which is directly contrary to, or inconsistent with, one previously assumed by him, at least where he had, or was chargeable with, full knowledge of the facts, and another will be prejudiced by his action.”) (quoting Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 218, 664 P.2d 745, 751 (1983)). In addition, the State’s argument that the jurors were 
29
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
afraid to return a “guilty” verdict is undercut by the jurors’
 
written guilty verdict as to Count II, kidnapping as a Class A
 felony, which the foreperson read in open court. Cf. United
 
States v. Watchmaker, 761 F.2d 1459, 1466 (11th Cir. 1985)
 (“Discussions among the jurors as to their fear of the defendants
 are not inappropriate, so long as such discussions do not lead
 them to form an opinion of the defendants’ guilt or innocence of
 the offenses charged.”). 
In sum, the State’s argument that the jury was not
 
“genuinely deadlocked” fails. 
2.	 The State’s argument regarding possible violations of
HRE Rule 606(b) is irrelevant
 
The State argues that the circuit court’s Moriwake
 
analysis “cannot be accepted as correct” because, during the
 
post-trial hearings, the circuit court “ignored the law and both
 counsels’ objections when soliciting repeatedly the jurors’
 opinions as to whether [Juror No. 1’s] experiment had an effect
 on their deliberations,” in violation of HRE Rule 606(b).
 
However, the State’s challenge of these hearings with
 
respect to Counts I, III, and IV is irrelevant. First, there is
 no indication in the record that the circuit court considered the
 impact of the duct tape experiment when evaluating Counts I, III,
 and IV under Moriwake. The circuit court instead conducted its
 own evaluation of the evidence and concluded that the conflicting
 
30
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
evidence as to whether there was duct tape on Duckworth’s body
 
when he was murdered was a major weakness in the State’s case
 with respect to Counts I, III, and IV.
 
Second, the circuit court’s inquiries appear to have
 
been conducted to inform the circuit court’s analysis of
 Deguair’s Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II (concerning juror
 misconduct with respect to Count II), but not Deguair’s Second
 Motion to Dismiss (concerning the Moriwake factors only regarding
 Counts I, III, and IV). The State did not challenge the Order re
 Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II on appeal before the ICA or
 this Court. In other words, the State’s argument regarding the
 juror misconduct revealed during the post-trial hearings appears
 to be irrelevant to the circuit court’s Moriwake analysis with
 respect to Counts I, III, and IV, and accordingly this argument
 is irrelevant to the issues in the State’s Application.
 
3.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
dismissing Counts I, III, and IV under the Moriwake
factors
 
In Moriwake, this court addressed whether trial courts
 
have discretionary power sua sponte to dismiss an indictment over
 
the objection of the prosecuting attorney. 65 Haw. at 55, 647
 P.2d at 712. The court held, “the judicial power which seeks to
 administer justice is properly invoked when a trial court sua
 sponte dismisses an indictment with prejudice following the
 
31
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
declaration of one or more mistrials because of genuinely
 
deadlocked juries, even though the defendant’s constitutional
 rights are not yet implicated.” Id. (internal quotation marks
 
omitted). 
Although the Moriwake Court acknowledged the
 
discretionary nature of trial courts’ judicial power to dismiss
 an indictment and stated it would “accord deference” to the trial
 court’s conclusion, the court determined that “the magnitude of
 the respective interests of society and of criminal defendants
 which are implicated in this area of law requires that we more
 fully delineate the parameters within which this discretion is
 properly exercised.” Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712. The court set
 
forth the following test for balancing the interests of the State
 against fundamental fairness to the defendant:
 
The factors which the trial court should consider in
 
undertaking this balance include the following:  (1)
the severity of the offense charged; (2) the number of
prior mistrials and the circumstances of the jury
deliberation therein, so far as is known; (3) the
character of prior trials in terms of length,
complexity and similarity of evidence presented; (4)
the likelihood of any substantial difference in a
subsequent trial, if allowed; (5) the trial court’s
own evaluation of relative case strength; and (6) the
professional conduct and diligence of respective
counsel, particularly that of the prosecuting
attorney. 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712-13. 
In State v. Hinton, this court explained, “[n]othing in
 
Moriwake indicates that all factors must be given equal weight or
 
that certain factors must be given more weight than others.” 120
 
32
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Hawai'i at 280, 204 P.3d at 499. In Hinton, this court held that 
the ICA erred in (1) injecting a “separation of powers” analysis 
(i.e., assessing when a court might be inappropriately encroaching upon prosecutorial discretion) into the Moriwake framework, and (2) holding that the trial court abused its discretion in dismissing an indictment with prejudice after one mistrial. Id. at 278, 280, 204 P.3d at 497, 499. 
In this case, the circuit court, in the Second
 
Dismissal Order, applied the Moriwake balancing test and
 ultimately granted Deguair’s motion to dismiss Counts I, III, and
 IV. The circuit court concluded:
 
Given the State’s evidence against the defendant, it
is the Court’s considered judgment that the chances of
the State persuading 12 jurors unanimously to find the
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt as charged
of Counts I, III and IV are virtually nil.  If the
 Court allowed a third, fourth or fifth retrial, all of
the juries would still be hung, and it would be
fundamentally unfair to the defendant, and a denial of
due process, to continue to put him in jeopardy by
subjecting him to another trial on Counts I, III and
IV.
 
Having resolved the State’s arguments challenging the
 
circuit court’s findings of fact regarding the jury’s six-to-six
 
split, supra, we hold that the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in dismissing Counts I, III, and IV under the factors
 set forth in Moriwake.
 
a. The Severity of the Offense Charged
 
Under the first Moriwake factor, the circuit court
 
33
    
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
found, “[i]t is undisputed that the charges against defendant are
 
extremely serious” (FOF No. 23). The court concluded, “the
 severity of the charges against [Deguair] argue[s] for allowance
 of a retrial” (COL No. 3). Because neither party challenged the
 circuit court’s analysis of the first Moriwake factor, we need
 not address or disturb it here.
11
 
b. 	The Number of Prior Mistrials and the
 
Circumstances of the Jury Deliberations Therein,
So Far as Known
 
With respect to the second Moriwake factor, the circuit
 
court concluded, “[e]ven though the jury that deliberated in the
 
second trial deliberated only two and a half days, and their
 deliberations were compromised by some juror misconduct, [the
 second Moriwake factor] . . . so far as is know[n], argue[s] only
 slightly for the allowance of a retrial” (COL No. 4).
 
In Moriwake, this court stated, “[w]ithout suggesting
 
that trial courts are not free, within the bounds of properly
 exercised discretion, to differ, we proffer that in most cases,
 serious consideration be given to dismissing an indictment with
 prejudice after a second hung jury mistrial.” 64 Haw. at 57, 647
 P.2d at 713. This court has also indicated that the circuit
 court may consider the numerical breakdown of the hung jury under
 
11
 This court has suggested that “murder . . . [and] kidnapping” are 
relatively serious offenses for purposes of the first Moriwake factor.
Hinton, 120 Hawai 'i at 278, 204 P.3d at 497.  
34
    
  
      *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the second Moriwake factor. See Hinton, 120 Haw. at 278-79, 204
 
P.3d at 497-98 (“The trial court found that this factor weighed
 
in favor of retrial because there had been only one trial and,
 although the jury indicated that it was eight to four for
 acquittal at one point, it seemed confused.”). 
The following factual findings of the circuit court are
 
relevant to the second Moriwake factor: both trials ended in a
 mistrial (FOF Nos. 3, 17, 24); jury deliberations lasted seven
 days in the first trial (FOF No. 3) and two and one-half days in
 the second trial (FOF Nos. 14, 25); in the first trial, the
 jurors were evenly split on Counts I through IV, (FOF Nos. 4, 24,
 
26); in the second trial, the jurors were evenly split on Counts
 
I, III, and IV, (FOF Nos. 18, 24, 26); during the jury
 
deliberations for the second trial, the jury informed the circuit
 court that it was “deadlocked” on Counts I, III, and IV (FOF No.
 14); and the jury deliberations in the second trial were
 
“compromised by some juror misconduct” (FOF No. 25). In
 
addition, although the circuit court did not make a specific
 
finding in this regard, when asked by the circuit court whether
 more time would assist the jury in reaching a unanimous verdict
 on Counts I, III, and IV, the jury responded, “[n]o, the jury has
 unanimously decided that more time will not help.”
 
Because the two trials for this case ended in a
 
35
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
mistrial when the jurors were evenly split and unable to reach a
 
unanimous decision on Counts I, III, and IV, the circuit court
 did not “exceed the bounds of reason” in concluding that the
 
second Moriwake factor weighed “only slightly for the allowance
 
of a retrial” (COL No. 4).
 
c.	 The Character of Prior Trials in Terms of Length,
Complexity, and Similarity of Evidence Presented
 
The circuit court concluded that the third Moriwake
 
factor “argue[s] very strongly against a retrial” (COL No. 5). 
A comparison between the evidence presented, witnesses 
testifying, and legal theories argued in each trial are relevant 
to the third Moriwake factor. See Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 49, 57, 
647 P.2d at 708, 713. Relevant considerations can include, for example, the complexity of a trial and whether a case turns on credibility. Hinton, 120 Hawai' i at 279, 204 P.3d at 498. 
Accordingly, the circuit court’s factual findings
 
relevant to this conclusion are as follows: both trials lasted
 approximately eight days, which was “somewhat long for criminal
 trials” (FOF Nos. 2, 12, 26); although both trials involved “a
 lot of witnesses [and] a lot of evidence, . . . at their core,
 the cases were credibility contests and not complex” (FOF No.
 26); and the second trial involved an additional “alleged
 
36
    
  
 
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
12
  to Duckworth’s murder, which “did not appear to
 eyewitness”
make a difference because the jury still voted six jurors for not
 
guilty and six jurors for guilty” (FOF No. 26). In addition, at
 
the May 18, 2011 hearing on Deguair’s motions, the circuit court
 
stated that “the single most important factor in the court’s view
 is that these were–-it’s not a complex case . . . . 
It’s
 
credibility at its core.”
 
With respect to the murder and related firearm charges,
 
the issues boil down to whether the jury believed Teo’s story,
 that Deguair shot and killed Duckworth even though no duct tape
 was found on his body, or Deguair’s story, that Teo murdered
 Duckworth. Given the circuit court’s consideration of the
 similarities between both trials with respect to the legal
 theories, evidence presented, and witnesses who testified, and
 its finding that the case was not complex and turned on
 credibility, the circuit court did not “exceed the bounds of
 reason” in concluding that the third Moriwake factor “argue[s]
 very strongly against a retrial” (COL No. 5).
 
12
 In opposition to Deguair’s Second Motion to Dismiss, the State
 
contended that the second trial differed from the first because two additional
 
witnesses–-James and Woo–-testified for the State in the second trial.
 Although the circuit court did not make a finding regarding James in the
second trial, the State does not challenge the absence of such finding in its
Application. Regardless, James’s testimony was not highly significant and,
similar to Woo’s, apparently did not appear to make a difference.
 
37
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
d.	 The Likelihood of Any Substantial Difference in a
Subsequent Trial, if Allowed
 
The circuit court concluded that the fourth Moriwake
 
factor “argues very strongly against a retrial” (COL No. 6).
 
This court has indicated that whether the evidence 
submitted in a subsequent trial would be substantially different 
from prior trials is relevant to this factor. Hinton, 120 
Hawai'i at 279, 204 P.3d at 498. 
In opposition to Deguair’s Second Motion to Dismiss,
 
the State explained its intention to submit fingerprint evidence
 that was permitted during the first but not the second trial and
 to again attempt to consolidate Deguair’s case with another that
 supposedly linked Deguair to a 2007 home robbery. In its
 Application, the State does not raise any arguments regarding new
 evidence it might propose to introduce at a subsequent trial.
 
The circuit court concluded, “[a]dditional evidence
 
that the State proposes to offer in the third trial in the
 Court’s view would not make a difference, and the Court finds no
 cogent reasons for changing earlier pretrial rulings relating to
 evidence and [denial of] consolidation of cases, thus the
 evidence in the third trial would be substantially the same as
 the second trial” (FOF No. 27), and “[t]here was no substantial
 likelihood of a substantial difference in the result of a
 retrial” (FOF No. 28).
 
38
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In sum, the circuit court fully considered the evidence
 
that the State proposed to introduce in a subsequent trial and
 
concluded that the fourth Moriwake factor weighs “very strongly
 against a retrial.” 
This conclusion is consistent with the
 
record.
 
e. The Relative Case Strength
 
The circuit court concluded that the fifth Moriwake
 
factor “argues very strongly against a retrial” (COL No. 7).
 
Under this factor, the trial court may evaluate the
 
evidence. See Hinton,  120 Hawai' i at 279-280, 204 P.3d at 498­
99.
 
The circuit court found as follows:
 
29. The State had significant problems with the
quality of its evidence even though it was able to
present the testimony of the two alleged eyewitnesses
to the murder who in one sense essentially testified
consistent with each other about the circumstances of
 murder, but directly contradicted each other as to
their alleged involvement with the defendant in the
murder.  There was also strong evidence of defendant’s
alleged motive to murder Jermaine Duckworth, and
corroborating evidence that the defendant rented the
car in another person’s name and washed it twice after
the murder.
 
30. However, the crux of the State’s problem with the
quality of its evidence was that based on both Teo’s
and Woo’s testimony, Jermaine Duckworth was presumably
still taped with duct tape when the defendant
allegedly shot Duckworth and pushed him off the cliff
at Yokohama Bay, yet there was no tape on Jermaine
Duckworth’s body, or any other evidence consistent
with Teo’s and Woo’s testimony, explaining why no tape
was found on Jermaine Duckworth, or what happened to
the duct tape.
 
At trial, Deguair admitted that he placed duct tape on
 
Duckworth. Two other witnesses testified that they saw Deguair
 
39
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
place duct tape on Duckworth. In addition, Teo and Woo both
 
testified that they saw Deguair and Duckworth walking down the
 stairs together, and that Duckworth was bound with duct tape. 
Yet, both Teo and Woo testified that they did not see anyone
 remove the duct tape from Duckworth, and Teo testified that
 Duckworth was still bound when he was allegedly shot and
 murdered. No party disputes that there was no duct tape on
 Duckworth’s body when he was found dead at Yokohama Bay. 
Because the circuit court evaluated the State’s case
 
and concluded that it was not strong enough to merit another
 trial when weighed against fundamental fairness to the defendant,
 the circuit court did not “exceed the bounds of reason” in
 concluding that this factor weighs heavily against retrial. 
f.	 The Professional Conduct and Diligence of
Respective Counsel, Particularly that of the
Prosecuting Attorney
 
With respect to the sixth Moriwake factor, the circuit
 
court found:
 
The State’s prosecutor is an excellent prosecutor, one
of the best prosecutors in the prosecutor’s office,
and diligently and professionally presented the
State’s case to the jury.  No other prosecutor from
the prosecutor’s office would have done better in
presenting the State’s case to the jury.
 
(COL No. 31).
 
The circuit court concluded that the sixth Moriwake
 
factor “argue[s] very strongly against a retrial” (COL No. 8).
 
Because neither party challenged the circuit court’s analysis of
 
40
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the sixth Moriwake factor, we need not address or disturb it
 
here.
 
In conclusion, the ICA correctly concluded that the
 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing with
 prejudice Counts I, III, and IV under Moriwake.
 
B.	 Deguair’s Application
 
Deguair presents the following questions:
 
1) Did the Intermediate Court of Appeals Gravely Err
in Ru
ling That a Retrial of the Count Two Kidnapping
Charge Was Not Barred by Double Jeopardy? 
2) Di
d the Intermediate Court of Appeals Gravely Err
in Failing to Address Whether the Trial Court Erred in
Recalling the Jury?
 
We hold that (1) the ICA did not err in concluding that
 
retrial of Count II was not barred by double jeopardy, and (2)
 
the ICA did not err in declining to address whether the circuit
 court erred in recalling the jury. 
1.	 The retrial of Count II was not barred by double
jeopardy
 
Deguair argues that once the jury was discharged in
 
open court on April 5, 2011, double jeopardy barred the State
 
from subjecting Deguair to a third trial because the trial court
 erroneously found that there was manifest necessity for a
 mistrial in Count Two.
 
The State responds that double jeopardy does not bar
 
retrial.  The State adopts the ICA’s reasoning that Deguair’s
 
double jeopardy argument was without merit because Deguair
 
41
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
conceded there was manifest necessity to declare a mistrial on
 
Count II by arguing that the circuit court should vacate Count II
 because of juror misconduct. The State further argues that
 Deguair “consented to the trial court’s declaration of mistrial
 on count II” by explicitly agreeing with the circuit court’s
 position on Count II, not objecting when the circuit court
 reiterated its intention to declare a mistrial, and not objecting
 after the circuit court declared a mistrial.
 
Generally, under the double jeopardy clauses of the 
United States and Hawai' i constitutions, “a defendant may not be 
put in jeopardy twice for the same offense.” State v. Wilmer, 97 
Hawai'i 238, 243, 35 P.3d 755, 760 (2001) (citing U.S. Const. 
amends. V & XIV; Hawai' i Const. art. I, § 10). 
This court has “described the purpose underlying the
 
prohibition against double jeopardy” as follows:
 
The underlying idea, one that is deeply ingrained in
at least the Anglo-American system of jurisprudence,
is that the State with all its resources and power
should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to
convict an individual for an alleged offense, thereby
subjecting him to embarrassment, expense and ordeal
and compelling him to live in a continuing state of
anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the
possibility that even though innocent he may be found
guilty.
 
State v. Quitog , 85 Hawai' i 128, 140, 938 P.2d 559, 571 (1997) 
(quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Scott, 437
 
U.S. 82, 87-88 (1978)).
  
This court has also “recognized that there are three
 
42
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
separate and distinct aspects to the protections offered by the 
double jeopardy clause.” Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 141, 938 P.2d at 
572 (quoting State v. Ontiveros, 82 Hawai' i 446, 450, 923 P.2d 
388, 392 (1996)). Thus, “[d]ouble jeopardy protects individuals against: (1) a second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal; (2) a second prosecution for the same offense after conviction; and (3) multiple punishments for the same offense.” Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 141, 938 P.2d at 572 (internal quotations 
marks omitted) (quoting Ontiveros, 82 Hawai' i at 450, 923 P.2d at 
392). 
“However, even when a trial ends without a judgment, a 
defendant’s constitutional right to ‘have his trial completed by a particular tribunal’ still exists.” Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 141, 
938 P.2d at 572 (quoting Arizona v. Washington, 434 U.S. 497, 503 (1977)). 
The reasons why this “valued right” merits
constitutional protection are worthy of repetition. 
Even if the first trial is not completed, a second
prosecution may be grossly unfair.  It increases the
 finan
cial and emotional burden on the accused,
prolongs the period in which he is stigmatized by an
unresolved accusation of wrongdoing, and may even
enhance the risk that an innocent bystander may be
convicted.  The danger of such unfairness to the
defendant exists whenever a trial is aborted before it
 is completed.  Consequently, as a general rule, the
prosecutor is entitled to one, and only one,
opportunity to require an accused to stand trial.
 
Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 141, 938 P.2d at 572 (emphases in original) 
(quoting Washington
, 434 U.S. at 503-05). 
Nonetheless, “retrial is not automatically barred [by 
43
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
the double jeopardy clause] when a criminal proceeding is
 
terminated without finally resolving the merits of the charges
 against the accused.” State v. Lam, 75 Haw. 195, 199-200, 857
 
P.2d 585, 588-89 (1993) (brackets original to Lam, quotation
 
marks omitted) (quoting Washington, 434 U.S. at 505).
 
Because of the variety of circumstances that may make
it necessary to discharge a jury before a trial is
concluded, and because those circumstances do not
invariably create unfairness to the accused, his
valued right to have the trial be concluded by a
particular tribunal is sometimes subordinate to the
public interest in affording the prosecutor one full
and fair opportunity to present his evidence to an
impartial jury.
 
Moriwake,  65 Haw. at 52, 647 P.2d at 710 (citing Washington, 434
 
U.S. at 505).
 
“Case law requires a balance between the rights of the 
accused and the public interest. 
Both are vitally important to 
our judicial system, and each must be considered in the context 
of a trial court’s rulings.” Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 142, 938 P.2d 
at 573 (quoting Lam, 85 Hawai' i 128, 75 Haw. at 199-200, 857 P.2d 
at 588-89). 
Accordingly, “[a] mistrial is properly declared and 
retrial is not barred by the defendant’s right against double jeopardy where the defendant consented to the mistrial or there was manifest necessity for the mistrial.” Wilmer, 97 Hawai' i at 
242-43, 35 P.3d at 759-60. 
In essence, the ICA concluded that even though the
 
44
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court was unaware of the juror misconduct at the time it
 
declared the mistrial on Count II, the subsequent discovery of
 such misconduct could justify the mistrial on the grounds of
 manifest necessity. However, we do not need to rely on that
 ground because the record establishes that Deguair consented to
 the mistrial. 
For purposes of double jeopardy, consent may be express
 
or implied. Lam, 75 Haw. at 201-02, 857 P.2d at 589. This court
 
has held, “[e]xplicit consent arises when a defendant voluntarily
 moves or argues for a mistrial. In such a situation, the
 defendant may be retried.” Id. In the case at bar, Deguair did
 
not voluntarily move or argue for a mistrial before the circuit
 court declared a mistrial on Count II on April 5, 2011. 
Therefore, there was no express consent. 
To determine whether a defendant impliedly consented to
 
a mistrial, “[t]he actions of a defendant and the facts of a case
 must be examined.” Id. at 202, 857 P.2d at 589. This court has
 
noted: 
[e]xamples of cases where waiver has been found
include those where the defendant failed to raise a
 double jeopardy claim at trial, or in a timely manner;
where a defendant pleaded no contest to a criminal
charge; where a defendant sought a continuance at
trial; where a defendant chose to oppose prosecution’s
motion to consolidate; and when a defendant sought a
new trial after being convicted.
 
State v. Miyazaki, 64 Haw. 611, 618-19, 645 P.2d 1340, 1346
 
(1982) (footnotes omitted) (emphasis added).
 
45
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Further, “[t]hese waiver cases underscore the necessity
 
of examining the particular facts of a case in determining
 
whether waiver of a defendant’s double jeopardy right has
 occurred.” Id. at 619, 645 P.2d at 1346. Accordingly, “this
 
court will not find waiver of constitutional rights readily but
 will carefully scrutinize facts of a case to determine if waiver
 has occurred.” Id. at 620, 645 P.2d at 1347. 
During jury deliberations in the case at bar, the
 
circuit court, without objection from either party, erroneously
 informed the jury in response to jury Communication No. 6 that a
 unanimous response was required for all three interrogatories
 
before it could submit a verdict on Count II.  After the jury
 
informed the circuit court that it was unable to reach a
 
unanimous response for the second interrogatory, the circuit
 court informed the parties that a mistrial would be declared on
 Count II. Again, neither party objected at that time. 
After the jury was called back into the courtroom, and
 
the foreperson delivered what it “believe[d] to be [its]
 verdict,” the circuit court called both counsel to the bench. 
The circuit court stated that because the jury was unable to
 reach a unanimous verdict as to Count II, it would not “receive
 the verdict as to Count II.” Although the State contended that a
 positive response as to only one of the three interrogatories was
 sufficient, when the circuit court asked for Deguair’s position,
 
46
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
Deguair explicitly “agree[d] with the court’s position” that to
 
accept a verdict on Count II, a unanimous response was required
 for all three interrogatories. In the presence of the jury, the
 circuit court declared a mistrial on Count II based on “manifest
 necessity.” Deguair did not object. The circuit court then
 scheduled the retrial, and Deguair did not object.
 Thus, the circuit court informed Deguair of its plan
 
to declare a mistrial because the jurors could not reach a
 unanimous response for all of the interrogatories, and when asked
 for his position, Deguair expressly agreed with that plan. Under
 these circumstances, Deguair consented to the circuit court’s
 declaration of a mistrial.
 
Deguair cites to two cases to support his argument that
 
retrial on Count II is barred by double jeopardy, State v. Lam,
 75 Haw. 195, 857 P.2d 585 (1993), and People v. McGee, 636 N.W.2d
 531 (Mich. App. 2001). However, they are distinguishable from
 the case at bar. 
In Lam, the prosecutor, after failing to elicit certain
 
testimony from a witness at trial, spoke to the witness during a
 recess. 75 Haw. at 197-98, 857 P.2d at 587-88. The trial court
 stated in a bench conference that it was “forced” to declare a
 mistrial, and indicated it would announce its ruling after a
 recess. Id. at 203, 857 P.2d at 590. After the recess, the
 
trial court declared a mistrial, and defense counsel subsequently
 
47
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
stated that such a ruling “would be over the objections of the
 
defense[.]” Id. Lam was subsequently re-charged, and Lam moved
 
to dismiss the charge based on double jeopardy grounds. Id. at
 
119, 857 P.2d at 588. At a hearing on the motion to dismiss, the
 motions judge granted the motion and denied the prosecution’s
 motion for reconsideration. Id. 
This court rejected the prosecution’s argument that Lam
 
impliedly consented to the mistrial by remaining silent when the
 trial court “first considered a mistrial[.]” Id. at 202, 857
 
P.2d at 590. This court concluded that “Lam had no duty to
 object to the mistrial prior to the recess[,]” and explained that
 “Lam provided the court with an alternative to declaring a
 mistrial by requesting that [the witness’s] testimony be
 stricken. In addition, Lam voiced his objection to the court’s
 declaration of a mistrial. He had no further duty.” Id. at 203,
 
857 P.2d at 590.
 
This court also rejected the prosecution’s argument
 
that Lam impliedly consented to the mistrial by “call[ing] the
 prosecution’s discussion with [the witness] to the court’s
 attention.” Id. at 204, 857 P.2d at 590. This court reasoned
 
that Lam “coupled his revelation to the [trial] court with a
 request to limit [the witness’s] testimony[,]” which could
 “hardly raise the implication of consent.” Id. 
Lam is distinguishable from the case at bar because
 
48
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
here, Deguair did not offer an alternative course to declaration
 
of a mistrial. Instead, when asked for his position, Deguair
 expressly agreed with the circuit court’s plan. 
In McGee, the Michigan Court of Appeals held that the
 
trial court erroneously declared a mistrial on the grounds that
 an alternate juror was present during jury deliberations. 636
 N.W.2d at 540. The court further held that retrial was barred by
 double jeopardy because the defendant did not “explicitly
 indicate[] consent to the mistrial, and we will not presume
 consent in the absence of an affirmative showing.” Id. at 537. 
The defendant “neither objected to nor agreed with the court’s
 conclusion that a mistrial was warranted.” Id. However, on
 
appeal, the Michigan Supreme Court held that because “[t]he
 record in this case reveals circumstances from which consent to
 the circuit court’s declaration of a mistrial can be inferred
 . . . . [,] retrial is not barred by the constitutional
 protection against double jeopardy.” McGee, 670 N.W.2d at 665. 
Therefore, the final disposition in McGee provides no support for
 Deguair’s argument that retrial is barred by double jeopardy. 
In sum, because Deguair impliedly consented to a
 
mistrial, retrial is not barred by double jeopardy. 
49
    
     *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
2.	 The ICA did not err in declining to address whether the
circuit court erred in recalling the jury
 
Deguair argues that the ICA should have addressed
 
whether the circuit court erred in recalling the jury.  Deguair
 
contends that because the circuit court did not have authority to
 
recall the jury, the circuit court should have disregarded its
 error in not accepting a guilty verdict as to Count II and should
 have instead analyzed Count II under 
Moriwake  as if the jury was
 
deadlocked on Count II.
 
Deguair’s argument that the circuit court should have
 
dismissed Count II under 
Moriwake as if the jury was deadlocked
 
on Count II fails. Before the circuit court recalled the jury
 for purposes of polling the jury, the circuit court realized it
 
had erred in not accepting the guilty verdict on Count II.  The
 
verdict form, which on its face showed that the jury had returned
 
a unanimous verdict of guilty as to Count II and unanimous
 responses for two of the three interrogatories, confirmed that
 the circuit court had erred. Thus, regardless of whether the
 circuit court had authority to recall the jury for purposes of
 polling the jury, the circuit court was not required to disregard
 its error and analyze Deguair’s Motion to Vacate and Dismiss
 Count II as if the jury was actually deadlocked as to Count II. 
Thus, whether the circuit court had authority to recall the jury
 for purposes of polling the jury is irrelevant to whether the
 
50
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
circuit court correctly ordered a retrial on Count II based on
 
the juror misconduct.
 
Further, the circuit court did not err in ordering a 
retrial on Count II. This court has held that “[a] fair trial by an impartial jury is guaranteed to the criminally accused by both the sixth amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, § 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution. Inherent in this 
requirement is that the jury be free from outside influences.” State v. Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 102, 807 P.2d 593, 596 (1991). “The defendant bears the initial burden of making a prima facie showing of a deprivation that ‘could substantially prejudice [his or her] right to a fair trial’ by an impartial jury.” State v. 
Chin, 135 Hawai' i 437, 443, 353 P.3d 979, 985 (2015) (emphasis 
and brackets in original) (quoting Williamson, 72 Haw. at 102, 807 P.2d at 596). “Once the defendant makes a prima facie showing of a deprivation, ‘a rebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised.’” Id. (quoting Williamson, 72 Haw. at 102, 807 P.2d 
at 596). “To overcome the presumption of prejudice, the State must prove that the outside influence on the jury was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 448, 353 P.3d at 990 (citing 
Williamson, 72 Haw. at 102, 807 P.2d at 596). In cases involving prejudicial juror misconduct, a retrial is an appropriate remedy. See, e.g., id. at 449, 353 P.3d at 991 (vacating the judgment of conviction and sentence and remanding to the circuit court for a 
51
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
new trial because the defendant’s fundamental right to a fair
 
trial by an impartial jury was compromised); Williamson, 72 Haw.
 at 104, 807 P.2d at 597 (remanding for a new trial because the
 juror misconduct at issue was not harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt).
 
In its Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II,
 
the circuit court concluded:
 
[T]he Court does not conclude as a matter of law that
the jury misconduct and the resulting statements that
were injected into the deliberations were harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt given the totality of the
circumstances of the trial and the jury’s
deliberation.
 
(COL No. 16)
 
The circuit court further concluded that Deguair’s
 
conviction on Count II should be vacated. Neither party
 
challenged these conclusions in the ICA or this court. 
Because it is undisputed that the jury misconduct in 
the case at bar was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, the circuit court correctly ordered a retrial on Count II. Consistent with Hawai' i case law, Deguair conceded that a new 
trial is the appropriate remedy for prejudicial juror misconduct by stating in his Motion to Vacate and Dismiss Count II, “Defendant respectfully submits that even standing alone each of the improper instances of jury behavior described above warrant vacating the kidnapping conviction and granting a new trial on the kidnapping count.” 
52
        *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
In sum, because the circuit court correctly ordered a
 
retrial based on juror misconduct, whether the circuit court had
 
the authority to recall the jury is moot. Therefore, the ICA did
 not err in declining to address whether the circuit court erred
 in recalling the jury.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the October 24,
 
2014 judgment of the ICA.
 
Donn Fudo for 
petitioner-respondent
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 /s/ Richard W. Pollack
 /s/ Michael D. Wilson
 Dwight C.H. Lum for
respondent-petitioner 
53
 