***FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI I, 
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
RINALDO J. TORRES, JR.,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-16-0000673 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-16 -0000673; CR. NO. 14- 1-1376) 
 
APRIL 10, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
  Under our precedents, a defendant in a criminal case 
relinquishes fundamental constitutional rights only when the 
rights are knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived.  To 
protect against the wrongful deprivation of these important 
rights, we require trial courts to conduct on-the-record 
colloquies prior to accepting such waivers, thereby ensuring 
that defendants understand the nature and consequences of their Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-16-0000673
10-APR-2019
09:21 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 decisions and make their choices freely.  We now reaffirm that 
the colloquy must be conducted so as to demonstrate that the 
waiver is a product of the defendant’s free will , undertaken in 
the absence of duress or other undue influence.  
  Our precedents also firmly establish that a 
defendant’s right to testify is of equal constitutional stature 
to the defendant’s corresponding right to refrain from 
testifying.  Despite our recognition of this symmetry, our 
current procedures require that a trial court engage a defendant 
in an on- the-record colloquy only when the defendant waives the 
right to testify--and not when the defendant waives the 
reciprocal right not to testify. 
  We hold that, because the two constitutional rights 
are of equal importance, they should be afforded equal levels of 
protection.  Accordingly, trial courts must engage the defendant 
in an on- the-record colloquy regarding the right to testify and 
to not testify when either right is waived, effectively making 
such a colloquy necessary in every trial.   Because we apply our 
holding only prospectively, however, and the circumstances and 
strength of the evidence in this case render any error on the 
part of the trial court harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, we 
affirm the defendant’s conviction s. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND  
A. Pretrial 
  On August 27, 2014, a grand jury 
of the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (circuit court) indicted Rinaldo J. Torres , 
Jr. on one count of robbery in the first degree in violation of 
Hawaii Revised S tatutes (HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(i) and/or 708-
840(1)(b)(ii)1 and one count of terroristic threatening in the 
first degree in violation of HRS §  707-716(1)(e).2  At his 
arraignment, Torres entered pleas of not guilty. 
                     
 1 HRS § 708-840(1)(b) (2014) provides the following: 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the first 
degree if, in the course of committing theft or non-
consensual taking of a motor vehicle:  
. . . . 
(b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument 
or a simulated firearm and:  
(i) The person uses force against the person of 
anyone present with intent to overcome that 
person’s physical resistance or ph ysical power 
of resistance; or 
(ii) The person threatens the imminent use of 
force against the person of anyone present with 
intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of 
or escaping with the property [.] 
 2 HRS § 707-716 (2014) provides in relevant part  the following : 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening 
in the first degree if the person commits terroristic 
threatening:  
. . . .  
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument or a 
simulated firearm.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4   Five days before trial was scheduled to begin, Torres 
submitted a Waiver o f Indictment/Trial b y Jury form to the 
court.  The form stated “I, the above named defendant, charged 
with violation of the indicated statute have been advised of my 
rights,” and it contained a box for the waiver of the right to 
an indictment and a box for the waiver of the right to a jury 
trial.  Torres checked the box that said “I waive my right to 
trial by jury and consent to a trial by the COURT without a 
jury” and signed the bottom of the form.   
 
 The trial began on March 23, 2015.3  Before opening 
statements, the court indicated that defense counsel had 
communicated Torres ’s desire to waive his right to a jury trial.  
The circuit court engaged in the following colloquy with Torres: 
THE COURT: You r
 lawyer has provided the Court with a waiver 
of trial by jury form.  And it appears to have your 
signature.  Is this your signature?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.  
THE COURT: Did you go over this form with your lawyer 
before you signed it?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  
THE COURT: And did you read and understand it before you 
signed it?  
THE DEFENDANT: I believe I did.  Yeah.  
THE COURT: Do you have any questions about this form?  
THE DEFENDANT: No.  
. . .  
                     
 3 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
5 THE COURT: Knowing the[] penalties [of robbery in the first 
degree and terroristic threat ening in the first degree], do 
you still want to go by way of a bench trial?  That is, a 
waiver of your right to a jury trial?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  I feel that  you will be fair in 
weighing the evidence against me.  Yes, Your Honor.  
THE COURT: Do you understand that you do have a right to a 
jury trial in this case?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, I do.  Thank you.  
THE COURT: And you understand that in a jury trial, you and 
your lawyer may participate in selecting twelve citizens 
who would serve as jurors in this case and decide whether 
you are guilty or not guilty of these crimes?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.  
THE COURT: And you understand that you and your lawyer, or 
you through your lawyer, will be able to ask questions of 
the jurors to determine whether they can be fair and 
impartial?  Do you understand that?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.  
THE COURT: And you understand that your lawyer will be 
given three peremptory challenges.  In ot her words, you and 
your lawyer will be permitted to excuse up to three jurors, 
without giving any reason for it.  . . .  Do you understand 
that? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  I understand that.  
THE COURT: And you understand that before you can be found 
guilty of the se crimes, all twelve jurors must agree that 
you are guilty.  In other words, their verdict must be 
unanimous.  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.  I understand that.  
THE COURT: And you understand that by giving up your right 
to a jury trial, you will be giving up all the se rights?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.  
THE COURT: And you also understand that by giving up your 
right to a jury trial, I --that is the judge --will decide 
whether you are guilty or not guilty of these crimes?  
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.  
. . .  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 THE COURT: Do you have any questions about what I have told 
you? 
THE DEFENDANT: No.  Still we still go through the same 
procedures as what my defense is and all that, right?  
THE COURT: Yes.  We will have a trial.  The only difference 
is between a jury-- 
THE DEFENDANT: We won’t have a jury.  
THE COURT: Yes.  
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.  I understand that.  
THE COURT: I will decide.  
THE DEFENDANT: Right, Your Honor.  Yes.  I requested that.  
. . .  
THE COURT: Do you want to waive your right to a jury trial?  
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: Okay.  The Court finds that Mr. Torres has 
voluntarily waived his right to a jury trial.  Also have 
done so knowingly and intelligently.  
B. Trial 
  Prior to trial commencing, the court did not advise 
Torres of his right to testify or of his right not to testify.   
1. State’s Case  
  The State first called Satoshi Tokunaga who testified 
that he was visiting from Japan in the summer of 2014 when the 
incident with Torres occurred.  He explained that on July 18, 
2014, while he was sitting on a bench in the Waikiki Shopping 
Plaza, a stranger approached him with a gun and pointed it at 
his head.  Tokunaga testified that the man hit him, he hit the 
man back, and the man unsuccessfully attempted to take his bag.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 During the incident, Tokunaga said, they were hitting each other 
and eventually the individual’s gun fell to the floor and both 
of them tried to grab it.  Tokunaga stated that after the man 
retrieved the gun, the man walked toward the nearby escalator,  
security arrived, and the incident ended.4   
 
 Tokunaga testified that after the incident, he spoke 
with detectives and identified a person in a photo lineup that 
“show[ed] the face of the suspect” and that looked like the 
stranger who had approached him.  Tokunaga was also shown a 
series of videos during his testimony that  depicted the events 
as he had described.  Tokunaga identified the person in the 
videos as the person that approached him.  Tokunaga then made an 
in-court identification of Torres as the person that assaulted 
him.   
  El liot Aki, a security guard who responded to the 
incident at the shopping plaza,  testified that when he arrived 
at the scene he saw one person “breaking away”  from a group of 
people and starting to leave.  He explained that he began 
pursuing this person bec ause “this individual might have been 
the instigator” of the incident.  Aki
 said that the pursuit 
continued to the escalator and when he came close, the person 
“pivoted towards his right and pulled out this black object” 
                     
 4 The magazine from a pellet gun was recovered from the scene , and 
a photograph of it was entered into evidence.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 that “looked like a firearm” and po inted it at him.  Aki 
explained that he then turned around and ran back up the 
escalator and warned others in the area that the person on the 
escalator had a gun.  Aki said that he observed the individual 
continue down the escalator in a rushed manner with
 “his hands 
in the air with the weapon.”  Aki was shown the security camera 
video of the incident on the escalator, and he described the 
events again as the video was being played.   
2. Defense ’s Case 
  Prior to Torres being called as a witness, the court 
did not engage in a colloquy with Torres regarding his right to 
testify or his right not to testify. 
 
 Torres testified that he was at the shopping plaza on 
July 18, 2014, and that he approached Tokunaga and offered to 
sell him marijuana.  Torres explained that when he opened the 
bag of marijuana in front of Tokunaga’s face, Tokunaga grabbed 
him and punched him in the eye.5  After he  fell to the ground and 
stood back up, an altercation ensued, Torres  testified.  Torres 
admitted that he had a pellet gun on the day of the incident but 
said that it was in his bag and he never held it in the 
confrontation with Tokunaga.  He testified that the pellet gun 
likely fell out of his bag when he fell to the floor.  Torres 
                     
 5 Tokunaga denied that Torres ever offered to sell him marijuana.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 also stated that the pellet gun’s magazine, which was found on 
the ground at the scene, was never loaded in the pellet gun. 
  When security arrived, Torres testified that he picked 
up the pellet gun and his bag,  and he walked away from the scene 
still holding his pellet gun at his side as he approached the 
escalator.  Torres testified that while he was on the escalator, 
he tried to put the pellet gun in his pocket but it fell to the 
ground as he turned to look behind him.  Torres acknowledged 
that the person in the vi deo “look[ed] like [him]” and that he 
had the pellet gun out while going down the escalator, but he 
denied that he pointed it at anyone.  After Torres’s testimony, 
the defense rested. 
3. Verdict and Sentencing 
 
 The circuit court found Torres guilty of both counts .6  
Torres was sentenced to 20 years imprisonment for the robbery 
charge and 5 years imprisonment for the terroristic threatening 
charge; the sentences were imposed concurrently with each other.  
Torres filed a timely Notice of Appeal.
 
II. ICA PROC EEDINGS 
  On appeal,  Torres argued that the circuit  court erred 
by failing to advise him of his right not to testify before the 
trial.  Torres contended that this alone was reversible error 
                     
 6 The court found Tokunaga’ s testimony credible and Torres ’s 
testimony not credible.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 and that there is no requirement that the defendant show he was 
prejudiced by the lack of a colloquy.  But even if he was 
required to show prejudice, Torres asserted, he was prejudiced 
because the court’s error and his subsequent testimony 
eliminated the defense of proof of identity. 
 
 Torres also asserted that the circu it court 
erroneously determined that his waiver of jury trial was 
voluntary.  The colloquy was deficient, Torres maintained, 
because the court did not ask him whether the decision to waive 
a jury trial was his own decision or made under the influence or 
duress of another person.  Torres concluded that the failure of 
the circuit court to ask this specific question meant that the 
court had no basis for its finding that the waiver was 
voluntary.7 
 
 In its decision, the Intermediate Court of Appeals 
(ICA) held that when a trial court fails to provide a pretrial  
advisement, the defendant must show that the lack of the 
advisement caused actual prejudice.  The ICA reasoned that 
Torres’s testimony was essential to his defense of self- defense, 
and because he was the only witness that the defense called at 
trial, Torres would have been required to testify even if he was 
                     
 7 Torres also argued on appeal that the circuit court erred in 
denying the defense’s motion for judgment of acquittal and that his trial 
attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel.  Neither issue is raised 
before this court, and thus they are not addressed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 given a pretrial advisement.  Thus, the ICA concluded that 
Torres was not prejudiced by the lack of a 
pretrial  advisement.   
  
The ICA further held tha t the circuit court did not 
err in finding that Torres’s waiver of his right to a jury trial 
was voluntary.  The ICA explained that not only did Torres sign 
a Waiver of Trial by Jury form, but Torres also participated in 
an “extensive dialogue” with the circuit court in which he 
stated “I feel that you will be fair in weighing the evidence 
against me.”  The ICA concluded that under the totality of the 
circumstances test, these facts demonstrated that Torres waived 
his right to a jury trial knowingly and voluntarily.   
Thereafter, Torres’s application for certiorari was accepted by 
this court. 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
  The validity of a defendant’s waiver of constitutional 
rights in a criminal case is a question of law under the state 
and federal constitutions .  See State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai i 
165, 169, 415 P.3d 907, 911 (2018); 
State v. Sprattling, 99 
Hawaii 312, 316, 55 P.3d 276, 280 (2002).  “We answer questions 
of constitutional law by exercising our own independent 
constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case.  Thus,  
we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong 
standard.”  Sprattling, 99 Hawaii at 316, 55 P.3d at 280 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 (quoting State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai i 177, 182, 970 P.2d 485, 490 
(1998)). 
IV. DISCUSSION  
A. Torres Voluntarily Waived the Right to a Jury Trial 
  It is well established that Hawai i
 law recognizes the 
right to a jury trial as a fundamental right.   State v. Ibuos, 
75 Haw. 118, 120, 857 P.2d 576, 577 (1993).  This right cannot 
be relinquished absent a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary 
waiver.  State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai i 63, 68, 996 P.2d 268, 273 
(2000).  A waiver is knowing and intelligent when it is made 
with “full awareness  of both the nature of the right being 
abandoned and the consequences of the decision to abandon it.”  
Moran v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412, 421 (1986).  A waiver is 
voluntary when “it was the product of a free and deliberate 
choice rather than intimidation, coercion, or deception.”  Id. 8
  When determining whether the waiver of a jury trial is 
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary, we have “advised the tria l 
courts to conduct Duarte- Higareda’s suggested colloquy[.]”   9
                     
 8 Defendants charged with a non -petty crime  have a constitutional 
right “to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the district 
wherein the crime shall have been committed[.]”  Haw. Const. art. I, § 14; 
see also  State v. Wilson, 75 Haw. 68, 73, 856 P.2d 1240, 1243 (1993)  (“[A] 
defendant charged with a petty crime does not have a constitutional right to 
a jury trial.”) .  
 9 Notwithstanding this advisement, “we have rejected the argument 
that such a colloquy is required in every case.”  Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawaii at 
470, 312 P.3d at 902.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13 State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai i 465, 470, 312 P.3d 897, 902 
(2013) (citing Friedman, 93 
Hawaii at 69, 996 P.2d at 274).  In 
a Duarte-Higareda colloquy, the trial court informs the 
defendant “that (1) twelve members of the community compose a 
jury, (2) the defendant may take part in jury selection, (3) a 
jury verdict must be unanimous, and (4) the court alone decides 
guilt or innocence if the defendant waives a jury trial.”  
United States v. Duarte-Higareda , 113 F.3d 1000, 1002 (9th Cir. 
1997).  Here, the circuit court engaged Torres in a colloquy 
that essentially tracked the suggested Duarte -Higareda model.  
However, the Duarte-Higareda colloquy does not address whether a 
waiver is voluntary.
   
  Torres argues that the circuit court was required to 
specifically ask him whether the waiver was his own decision or 
“based upon duress or the influence of another person or other 
factors that might cause him to waive his rights against his 
will.”  Wi thout conducting this inquiry, Torres asserts, the 
circuit court had no basis for its finding that the jury waiver 
was voluntary. 
  This court has evaluated the voluntariness requirement 
of a waiver of a jury trial on several occasions.  In Friedman , 
the trial court asked the defendant during the colloquy, “Is 
your decision to waive your right to jury trial something you 
thought about and decided to do yourself voluntarily[ ?]” and the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 defendant answered, “Yes.”  93 Hawai i at 66, 996 P.2d at 271.  
We found the defendant’s waiver to be voluntary because the 
defendant “affirmatively indicated to the trial court that his 
waiver of the right to a jury trial was voluntary and a result 
of his own reflection .”  Id. at 70, 996 P.2d at 275.  
  In State v. Baker, the defendant signed his initials 
next to each paragraph on a form indicating that he intended to 
waive a jury trial except the paragraph stating that his waiver 
was not induced by promises or threats.  132 Hawai i 1, 3-4, 319 
P.3d 1009, 1011-12 (2014).  The trial court then engaged 
the 
defendant in a brief colloquy about the form.  Id. at 4, 319 
P.3d at 1012.  On appeal, this court explained that even when 
the defendant signs a written jury trial waiver form, the trial 
court is still required to co
nduct an oral colloquy to establish 
the validity of the waiver.  Id. at 6, 319 P.3d at 1014.  We 
concluded that the defendant’s waiver of jury trial was not 
voluntary because the defendant failed to initial next to the 
paragraph on the waiver form that addressed voluntariness and 
“none of the court’s questions were directed towards determining 
the voluntariness of [the defendant’s] waiver.”  Id. at 7, 319 
P.3d at 1015. 
  This court also evaluated voluntariness in the context 
of the right to testify in State  v. Eduwensuyi, 141 Hawai i 328, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 409 P.3d 732 (2018).  In that case, the trial court conducted a 
colloquy pursuant to Tachibana  v. State, 79 Hawai ‘i 226, 237, 900 
P.2d 1293, 1304 (1995), informing the defendant of the right to 
testify and the right not to 
testify.  Eduwensuyi , 141 Hawai i at 
330-31, 409 P.3d at 734-35.  We held that the Tachibana colloquy 
was deficient because the trial court failed to inform the 
defendant that no one could prevent him from testifying
.  Id. at 
333-34, 409 P.3d at 737-38.  This advisement “is critical,” 
explained the Eduwensuyi 
court, because it is “the only 
Tachibana advisement that emphasizes that the waiver of the 
right to testify must be voluntary [.]”  Id. at 334, 409 P.3d at 
738. 
  In State v. Solomon, this court evaluated 
voluntariness in the context of a guilty plea.  107 Hawai i 117, 
127, 111 P.3d 12, 22 (2005).  To determine voluntariness, we 
stated that “the trial court should make an affirmative showing 
by an on-the-record colloquy between the court and the 
defenda
nt” that it was the defendant’s decision to waive all of 
the constitutional rights associated with a guilty plea.  Id.  
(quoting State v. Vaitogi , 59 Haw. 52, 602, 585 P.2d 1259, 1265 
(1978) (internal quotations omitted)).  Similarly, for a waiver 
of the right to counsel to be “voluntarily and freely made ,” we 
have emphasized that the trial courts must ensure that “the 
record is complete” so as to show that the defendant understands ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 the risks and disadvantages of waiving counsel.  State v. Phua, 
135 Hawaii 504, 512, 517, 353 P.3d 1046, 1054, 1059 (2015). 
  This court’s case law clearly demonstrates that when a 
defendant waives a fundamental right, there must be an 
affirmative,  on-the-record showing that the waiver of the right 
is voluntary.  I t is thus incumbent on the trial court to have a 
basis to conclude that a waiver is voluntary.  Unless 
voluntariness is gleaned from the defendant’s responses, the 
trial court must inquire into the voluntariness of the waiver.  
See Baker, 132  Hawaii at 7, 319 P.3d at 1015 (holding that there 
was no basis for concluding the defendant’s waiver of jury trial 
was voluntary when the court failed to include questions 
regarding voluntariness in its colloquy).  Accordingly, a direct 
question about voluntariness is required when the defendant ’s 
statements in the colloquy do not indicate that the decision to 
waive a jury trial is the defendant’s own free and deliberate 
choice.   
  Thus, because the circuit  court did not ask a direct 
question addressing whether Torres’s waiver was  voluntary, his 
responses to  the court must demonstrate that his waiver was his 
own decision without influence of duress or coercion.  To 
determine whether the waiver was voluntary, we evaluate “the 
totality of facts and circumstances ” of the record in this case.  
Friedman, 93 Hawai‘i at 68-69, 996 P.2d at 273-74.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17   During the colloquy, Torres asked whether, during a 
non-jury trial, “we still go through the same procedures as what 
my defense is and all that, right?”  After the circuit court 
explained that the difference between a jury trial and non-jury 
trial is that the court decides guilt or innocence, Torres said
, 
“Right, Your Honor.  Yes.  I requested that ,” indicating  that it 
was Torres’s own decision to waive a jury trial.  Additionally, 
when asked if he still wanted to proceed with a bench trial 
knowing the penalties that he was facing, Torres expressed his 
sentiment that “
I feel that you will be fair in weighing the 
evidence against me .”  This also evidences that Torres perceived 
a bench trial to be beneficial to him and that he made the 
decision based on this conclusion.   
 
 We conclude from the record, based on the totality of 
the circumstances, that Torres voluntarily waived his right to a 
jury trial.  See Friedman, 93 Hawai i at 68-69, 996 P.2d at 273-
74.  Torres’s responses  “affirmatively indicated” that his 
waiver of a jury trial was “a result of his own reflection”  and 
free will.  Id. at 70, 996 P.2d at 275.  Thus, the ICA did not 
err in holding that Torres’s waiver of his right to a jury trial 
was voluntary. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 B. Lewis /Monteil Pre trial Advisement  
1. The Circuit Court Erred b y Failing To Give a  Pretrial 
Advisement  
 
 Torres also argues that the circuit court’s failure to 
provide a pretrial advisement regarding his right not to testify 
was error under State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 
(2000). 
  In Lewis, this court held that trial courts must 
inform defendants of the right not to testify in a pretrial 
advisement.  Id. at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238.  There, the defendant 
testified at trial but was given neither a pretrial  advisement 
that he had the right not to testify nor an advisory during 
trial about this right before he testified.  Id.  at 294, 12 P.3d 
at 1235.  The Lewis court determined that there were positive 
effects to be obtained “in all cases from a trial court 
addressing a defendant” before trial about the defendant’s right 
not to testify.  Id. at 297, 12 P.3d at 1238.  Thus, we mandated 
that “trial courts 
‘prior to the start of trial , [shall] [] 
inform the defendant of his or her personal right to testify or 
not to testify[.] ’”  Id. (first alteration in original) (quoting 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai ‘i at 237 n.9, 
900 P.2d at 1304 n.9); see also 
State v. Monteil, 134  Hawaii 361, 373, 341 P.3d 567, 579 (2014) 
(affirming Lewis and adopting a prospective rule that trial 
courts are required to inform defendants during the 
Lewis ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 advisement that the decision not to testify cannot be used by 
the fact finder to decide the case). 
  Here, the circuit court clearly violated the mandate 
of Lewis: Torres was not given a pretrial advisement regarding 
his right not to testify nor was he advised that the exercise of 
this right may not be used by the fact finder to decide the 
case.  This was clear error by the circuit court. 
  This error may have been remedied if the circuit court 
had engaged in a colloquy with Torres before he testified and 
informed him of his right not to testify.  See  Monteil, 134 
Hawaii
 at 372, 341 P.3d at 578.  But the circuit court also 
failed to conduct a colloquy before Torres testified.  Thus, at 
no point in the trial proceedings did the circuit court inform 
Torres of his constitutional right not to testify.  U nder Lewis , 
Torres was entitled to a colloquy regarding the right not to 
testify.  T he circuit erred by not informing him of this right,  
and the record does not demonstrate a knowing, intelligent, and 
voluntary waiver. 
2. The Lack of a Pretrial Advisement Was Harmless Error  
  When the violation of a constitutional right has been 
established, “the conviction must be vacated unless the State 
can prove that the violation was harmless beyond a reasonable ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 10doubt.”   Tachibana, 79 Hawaii at 240, 900 P.2d at 1307.   Under 
the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, this court must 
determine “whether there is a reasonable possibility that error 
might have contributed to [the] conviction.”  State v. 
Eduwensuyi, 141 Hawai i 328, 336, 409 P.3d 732, 740 (2018) 
(quoting State v. Han, 130 Hawai i 83, 93, 306 P.3d 128, 138 
(2013)).  If such reasonable possibility exists, then “the 
judgment of conviction on which it may have been based must be 
set aside.”  State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai i 229, 248, 925 P.2d 797, 
816 (1996).  When assessing whether the error was harmless, “[a] 
crucial if not determinative consideration . . . is the strength 
of the prosecution’s case on the defendant’s guilt.”  State v. 
                     
 10 The State argues that the ICA was correct in holding  that a Lewis 
violation must satisfy  the “actual prejudice” standard.  Lewis stated that, 
“[b]ecause we view this prior -to-trial advisement as incidental to the 
‘ultimate colloquy,’ any claim of prejudice resulting from the failure of the 
trial court to give [the pretrial  advisement]  must meet the same ‘actual[] 
prejudice[]’ standard” espoused in Tachibana.  94 Hawai i at 297, 12 P.3d at 
1238 (third and fourth alteration s in original)  (citation omitted).  
Tachibana explained that a defendant must demonstrate actual prejudice when 
“a defendant asserts his or her right to testify during a colloquy conducted 
after the defense has rested and the trial is reopened to allow the defendant 
to testify[.]”  79 Hawai i at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304.  In such a situation, a 
defendant’s constitutional right to testify is not violated.  Rather, a court 
must determine whether there was actual prejudice to the defendant  as a 
result of the delay in engaging in  the colloquy.  In contrast, Tachibana  
stated that the failure of the court to give the ultimate colloquy  is subject 
to harmless error review.  Id. at 240, 900 P.2d at 1307.  We thus interpret 
Lewis to establish that a court’s failure to properly deliver the pretrial 
advisement is subject to the actual prejudice standard so long as the trial 
court subsequently  engages the defendant in the ultimate Tachibana  colloquy.  
When the ultimate colloquy is not given, however, a Lewis violation is 
evaluated under the harmless beyond a reasonable  doubt standard.  Because 
here Torres received neither the pretrial  Lewis advisement nor the ultimate 
Tachibana colloquy, we apply the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 Tetu, 139 Hawai i 207, 226, 386 P.3d 844, 863 (2016) (quoting 
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai i 462, 482- 83, 946 P.2d 32, 52- 53 
(1997)). 
  E ven had Torres been advised of his right not to 
testify and chosen to exercise this right, the sum effect would 
be that Torres’s trial testimony would not have been elicited.   
If Torres’s trial testimony is thus not considered , the evidence  
presented by the State with respect to the charge s in this case 
is nonetheless overwhelming.  To convict Torres of robbery, the 
State was required to prove that Torres was armed with a 
“dangerous instrument or a simulated firearm”11 and either used 
force with the intent to overcome Tokunaga’s physical resistance 
or threatened the use of imminent force with the intent to 
compel Tokunaga’s acquiescence to the taking of his property.  
HRS §§ 708- 840(1)(b)(i), (ii).  Tokunaga’s testimony described 
the events of his encounter with Torres in great  detail.  
Tokunaga testified that he  was sitting alone on a bench in a 
shopping mall and had a clear view  of Torres approaching.   
Tokunaga stated that he observed Torres wearing a blue shirt, 
glasses, and “short pants.”   When Torres arrived at the bench, 
Tokunaga testified, he saw Torres’s  face and then saw Torres 
                     
 11 HRS § 708-840(2) defines “simulated firearm” as any object that 
“(a) Substantially resembles a firearm; (b) Can reasonably be perceived to be 
a firearm; or (c) Is used or brandished as a firearm.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 point a gun at the right side of his head.  Torres hit him in 
the face and tried to take his bag, Tokunaga stated, at which 
point he hit Torres back and a physical encounter ensued.  
Tokunaga further testified that a t the conclusion of the 
encounter, he  “saw his face” again  as Torres stood up and walked 
to the nearby escalator.  
 
 Tokunaga’s testimony was verified by video evidence 
that shows Torres approach Tokunaga with a pellet gun, punch 
Tokunaga multiple times in the face while Tokunaga is still 
sitting on the bench, and continue to punch Tokunaga while 
Tokunaga was pinned on the ground.   Tokunaga unequivocally 
identified Torres during trial as the person who attacked him.  
The evidence also demonstrated that the pellet gun was a 
“simulated firearm”; both Tokunaga and Aki testified that the 
pellet gun resembled a real firearm, and it plainly appears to 
be a real firearm in the video.  Further, a photograph of the 
magazine from the pellet gun recovered from the scene was 
entered into evidence.12   
 
 As t o the terroristic threatening charge, the State 
needed to prove that Torres threatened Aki with a simulated 
                     
 12 It is noted that if Torres had not testified, there would not 
have been any evidence of self -defense, which was the defense asserted by 
Torres at trial to the robbery charge.  At the ICA, Torres contended that he 
could have presented an identification defense.  However, as described, the 
State presented overwhelming evidence that Torres was the assailant appearing 
in the video.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 firearm with the intent to terrorize him or in reckless 
disregard of the risk of terrorizing him.  HRS §§ 707-715(1), 
707-716(1)(e).13  Aki testified  that during his  pursuit of a man 
leaving the scene of the incident, the man pointed “what looked 
like a firearm” at him while the man was descending down the 
escalator.  Aki’s testimony was substantiated by  video evidence.  
These videos document Torres’s movements from three different 
camera angles from the time that Torres stood up at the end of 
the encounter with Tokunaga 
to when he stepped off of the 
escalator.  They show Torres carrying the pellet gun in his 
right hand to the escalator, turning to face Aki while Torres 
was on the escalator, and getting  off the escalator with the gun 
in his right hand pointed upwards.  And, as explained, the 
testimony and video demonstrate  that the pellet gun was a 
“simulated firearm.”   
 
 Because of the strength of the State’s evidence 
adduced from Tokunaga and Aki and the corroborating videos, the 
circuit court’s error in not advising Torres of his right not to 
testify was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  
See Tetu, 139 
Hawaii at 226, 386 P.3d at 863 (video f
ootage and witness 
testimony presented “compelling” evidence  of defendant’s guilt 
                     
 13 HRS § 707-715 (2014) defines “ terroristic threatening ” as a 
threat “by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to another person or  . . . 
to commit a felony . . . [w]ith the intent to terrorize, or in reckless 
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, ano ther person[.]”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 and thus trial court error was harmless); State v. Rivera, 62 
Haw. 120, 128, 612 P.2d 526, 532 (1980) (where there was a 
“wealth of overwhelming and compelling evidence”  tending to show 
defendant’s guilty beyond a reasonable doubt the error was 
harmless).  Because the error was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt, we affirm Torres’s conviction s. 
C. Prospectively, a Tachibana Colloquy Must Be Given in All 
Trials 
  A  defendant in a criminal case “ has an absolute right 
not to testify.”  Salinas v. Texas, 570 U.S. 178, 184 (2013) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Turner v. United 
States, 396 U.S. 398, 433 (1970) (Black, J., dissenting)).  In 
Hawaii, the right not to testify has been recognized since as 
early as the nineteenth century.  
See The King v. McGiffin , 7 
Haw. 104, 113 (Haw. Kingdom 1887) (holding that a comment by the 
prosecution about the defendant ’s failure to testify was “highly 
improper , and contrary to the statute” although not prejudicial 
in the particular case).   
  This right is explicitly guaranteed by the United 
States Constitution under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments  
and by the Hawai i Constitution under 
article I, section 10.14  
                     
 14 The United States Constitution states that “ [n]o person shall be 
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.”  U.S. Const. 
amend. V.  It further provides that “ [n]o state shall . . . deprive any 
person of life, libert y, or property, without due process of law.”  U.S. 
(continued . . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 Monteil, 134 Hawai i at 369, 341 P.3d at 575.  The Fifth 
Amendment’s protection is “fulfilled only when an accused is 
guaranteed the right to remain silent unless he chooses to speak 
in the unfettered exercise of his own will.  The choice of 
whether to testify in one’s own defense is an exercise of the 
constitutional privilege.”   Rock v. Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44, 53 
(1987) (quoting Harris v. New York
, 401 U.S. 222, 230 (1971)) 
(internal quotations and alterations omitted).   Additionally, 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
secures “the right of a criminal defendant to choose between 
silence and testifying [o] n his own behalf.”  Ferguson v. 
Georgia, 365 U.S. 570, 602 (1961) (Clark, J., concurring); see 
also Harris, 401 U.S. at 225 (“Every criminal defendant is 
privileged to testify in his own defense, or to refuse to do 
so.”)
. 
  Under our current procedures, however, the right not 
to testify does not receive protection equivalent to the 
corresponding right to testify in one’s own defense --a 
foundational constitutional right of equivalent stature.   That 
is, one fundamental right (the right to testify) is more greatly 
                                                                 
(. . . continued) 
 
Const. amend. XIV, § 1 .  Similarly, the Hawaii Constitution states that “ [n]o 
person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against 
oneself.”  Haw. Const. art. I, § 10. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 protected than the equally fundamental parallel  right (the right 
not to testify).   
  As discussed, we held in Lewis that courts must advise 
a defendant prior to the start of trial of both the right to 
testify and the right not to testify.  94 Hawai‘i at 297, 12 P.3d 
at 1238.  This advisement supplements the “ultimate colloquy” 
regarding the right to testify that we held in Tachibana must be 
given at the close of the defendant’s case if the defendant has 
not testified.  79 Hawai ‘i at 237 n.9, 900 P.2d at 1304 n.9.  Yet 
we have thus far declined to require trial courts to engage the 
defendant in a corresponding colloquy regarding the right not to 
testify when a defendant elects to take the stand.  See Lewis, 
94 Hawai‘ i at 295-96, 12 P.3d at 1236- 37.  In other words, we 
have required courts to confirm that a defendant’s waiver of the 
right to testify is knowing, intelligent, and voluntary, but we 
have not required a similar confirmation regarding a defendant’s 
waiver of the fundamental right not to testify. 
  This disparate treatment makes it easier for a 
defendant in a criminal case to waive the right not to testify 
than to waive the right to testify because there is no “ultimate 
colloquy” from the court regarding the right not to testify and 
its consequences.  
By contrast, when a defendant waives the 
right to testify, the defendant must make an  on-the-record, 
affirmative choice by answering questions from  the court ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 confirming such a decision.  This case demonstrates why the 
right not to testify deserves protection that is equal to that 
of the right to testify.  
  
In Tachibana, this  court recognized that there was a 
necessary balance between the right to testify and the right not 
to testify.  79 Hawai i at 235, 900 P.2d at 1302.  We noted the 
risk that advising the defendant of the right 
to testify could 
influence the defendant’s decision on whether to waive the right 
not to testify, which was a 
“constitutionally explicit and more 
fragile right.”  Id.
 (quoting United States v. Martinez, 883 
F.2d 750, 760 (9th Cir. 1989)).  Thus, the 
Tachibana  court 
advised trial courts to advise defendants of both the right to 
testify and the right not to testify in order to “reduce the 
possibility that the trial court’s colloquy could have any 
inadvertent effect on either the defendant’s right not to 
testify or the attorney-client relationship.”  Id. at 237 n.9 , 
900 P.2d at 1304 n.9. 
  This court reiterated the importance of this “even 
balance” between a defendant’s right to testify and the right 
not to testify in Monteil.   134 Hawai‘i at 370, 341 P.3d at 576.   15
                     
 15 In Monteil, the defendant testified after the trial court 
informed hi m prior to trial that he had the “right to remain silent and the 
right against self -incrimination ” and that if he chose to testify that the 
State would be able to cross -examine him and the court would consider his 
testimony in deciding guilt or innocence.  134 Hawai i at 362-63, 365, 341 
P.3d at 568 -69, 571.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 We explained that “Hawai i has historically protected both the 
right to testify and the right not to testify.”  Id. at 369, 341 
P.3d at 575.  The danger in providing an “imbalance in 
information” between the right to testify and the right not to 
testify, we explained, was that the “more fragile right” not to 
testify would be threatened because defendants that choose to 
testify would not be informed of the “relevant circumstances” of 
their decision from the beginning of the trial.  Id.  at 372, 341 
P.3d at 578.  Specifically, the court reasoned that the failure 
to advise a defendant that the exercise of the right not to 
testify “could not be used against him in deciding the case,” 
undermined the purposes of the pretrial advisement: to limit 
post-conviction challenges and to avoid “inadvertently 
influenc[ing]” the defendant’s decision -making process in 
deciding whether to testify.  
Id.   
  These repeated statements of the importance of 
properly balancing the constitutional right to testify with the 
equally important right not to testify are at odds with our 
current practice of not requir ing a Tachibana  colloquy when a 
defendant waives the right not to testify.  The disparity is 
even more striking when we consider other  parallel contexts in 
which our precedent requires trial courts to conduct an on-the-
record colloquy to ensure that a waiver of a constitutional 
right is knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29   For example, in State v. Ibuos,  the trial court 
accepted a jury trial waiver from the defendant’s counsel .  75 
Haw. 118, 118, 857 P.2d 576, 577 (1993).  Because the defendant 
had a constitutional right to a jury trial, this court held that 
the trial court erred when it failed to conduct an on -the-record 
colloquy to ensure that the defendant waived the right to a jury 
trial knowingly and voluntarily.  Id. at 120, 857 P.2d at 577 .  
Similarly, in State v. Murray,  defense counsel stipulated that 
the defendant had previously been c onvicted of abuse of a family 
or household member, which was an element of the charged 
offense.  116 Hawai i 3, 5, 169 P.3d 955, 957 (2007).   The 
stipulation was accepted by the trial court without a colloquy 
between the court and the defendant.  Id.   On appeal, this  court 
held that defendants in a criminal case have a constitutionally 
and statutorily protected right to have each element of an 
offense proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id.  at 10, 169 P.3d 
at 962.  Thus, th e court in Murray  held that trial courts must 
engage in a colloquy with a defendant when the defendant seeks 
to waive, via stipulation, the right to have the State prove 
each element of an offense.  Id. at 12, 169 P.3d at 964.  And in 
State v. Phua, the defendant appeared at a sentencing hearing 
without an attorney and the trial court conducted a brief 
colloquy informing the defendant of the right to counsel.  135 
Hawaii 504, 508- 09, 353 P.3d 1046, 1050-51 (2015).  This court ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 held that because the right to counsel was guaranteed by the 
United States Constitution and the Hawai i Constitution, a 
defendant’s waiver of the right to counsel  must be knowing, 
intelligent, and voluntary, as insured by an adequate on -the-
record colloquy.  Id. at 512, 353 P.3d at 1054. 
  Tachibana, as explained, held that the right to 
testify is a fundamental right  and that a trial court is 
required to engage in an on-the-record colloquy to ensure that 
waiver of the right is knowing, intelligent, and volu
ntary.  79 
Hawaii at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303.  Tachibana recognized that the 
right to testify derives partly from the right not to testify as 
provided by the Fifth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.  Id. at 231, 900 P.2d at 1298.  Thus, this court 
held that the decision whether to testify or not testify was a 
decision that was required to be decided by the defendant, not 
by defense counsel, and that trial courts had a duty to ensure 
that the waiver of the right to testify was knowing, 
intelligent, and voluntary.  See id. at 236 , 900 P.2d at 1303  
(quoting Hurn v. State, 872 P.2d 189, 198 (Alaska App. 1994) 
(“[T]he decision to testify or not rests with [the 
defendant.]”)).   
  Ibuos , Murray, Phua, and Tachibana all involved the 
waiver of a fundamental constitutional right, which is also the 
circumstance in this case.  
Like other fundamental rights, the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 waiver of the right not to testify should require a trial court 
to engage in an on-the -record colloquy with the defendant to 
ensure that the waiver is knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.  
This is necessary to protect the “constitutionally explicit and 
more fragile right, ” Tachibana , 79 Hawai i at 235, 900 P.2d at 
1302, that has been “historically protected ” by Hawai i law.  
Monteil, 134 Hawai i at 369, 341 P.3d at 575.  Additionally, 
adopting such an approach would be consistent with some of the 
important purposes of the colloquy requirement; it would protect 
a defendant from testifying based upon belief or advice that to 
do otherwise would result in an 
inference of guilt,  it would 
reduce the possibility that the trial court’s colloquy could 
“inadvertent[ly] effect” the defendant’s right not to testify,  
and it would reduce appeals (as exemplified in this case) and 
post-conviction challenges based on the d efendant’s asserted 
lack of a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of the 
right not to testify
.  See Murray, 16 Hawaii at 11-12, 169 P.3d 
at 963-64; Tachibana, 79 Hawaii at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303.  Thus, 
we hold that trial courts are required to engage in an on- the-
record colloquy with a defendant when the defendant chooses to 
testify to ensure that a waiver of the right not to testify is 
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.   The implication of such a 16
                     
16 Relying on People v. Mozee, 723 P.2d 117, 124 (Colo.  1986) (en 
(continued . . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 requirement merely requires  the trial court to give the 
Tachibana colloquy to a defendant whether or not the defendant 
elects to testify.  That is, we are providing equal treatment to 
two fundamental constitutional rights that merit equivalent 
protection.  This requirement will be effective in trials 
beginning after the filing date of this opinion. 
                                                                 
(. . . continued) 
 
banc), Lewis identified three rationales as to why such a colloquy was not 
required.  First, Lewis  stated that a defendant has likely received one or 
more Miranda  advisements from law enforcement officials during the course of 
the criminal investigation.  94 Hawaii at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237.  However, 
Miranda warnings are not given  upon every arrest; they are only required 
prior to conducting custodial interrogation  of the defendant.  See  State v. 
Kazanas, 138 Hawaii 23, 34 -35, 375 P.3d 1261, 1272 -73 (2016).  And, even if 
the Miranda  warnings are administered, there is an extended lapse of time 
between when they are given and when the defendant exercises or waives the 
right not to testify at trial.   
Second, the Lewis  court stated that a colloquy was not required when a 
defendant testifies because the defense counsel likely would not allow the 
defendant to take the stand without explaining to the defendant the right to 
remain silent and the possible consequences of waiving the right.  94 Hawaii 
at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237.  This rationale has been effectively rejected by 
subsequent cases of this court that have held that speculation about a 
defense counsel’s privileged, off -the-record conversation with the defendant 
cannot replace the trial court’s duty to conduct an on -the-record colloquy 
with a defendant.  See, e.g., State v. Eduwensuyi , 141 Hawai i 328, 336, 409 
P.3d 732, 740  (2018)(“ [A] court may not rely upon an off -the-record 
discussion between counsel and a defendant  to establish a valid waiver of a 
constitutional right.”) .  
 Finally, Lewis  reasoned that a colloquy was not required when a 
defendant testifies because “any defendant who testifies would expect to be 
cross-examined.”  94 Hawaii at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237 .  However, a defendant’s 
knowledge that the State has the opportunity to cross -examine the defendant 
is not equivalent to knowledge  of the constitutional right not to testify, 
nor to knowledge  of the protections afforded to the defendant when waiving 
the right to testify, such as the fact that the defendant’s silence cannot be 
used as an inference of guilt in deciding the case.  See Monteil, 134 Hawai i 
at 372-73, 341 P.3d at 57 8-79.   
 Accordingly, none of the reasons cited by the Lewis  court provide a 
persuasive basis to justify the disparate treatment that is accorded to the 
defendant’s fundamental right to not testify at trial.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, the ICA’s judgment on appeal 
is affirmed.   
Emmanuel G. Guerrero 
for petitioner 
 
Chad M. Kumagai 
for respondent /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
