*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI  
 
---o0o--- 
___________________________ _____________________________________  
 
JAY D. CADIZ, 
Petitioner/Claimant- Appellant,  
 
vs. 
 
QSI, INC., 
Respondent/Employer-Appellee, 
 
and 
 
FIRST INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAI ‘I, LTD., 
Respondent/Insurance Carrier
-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-14-0000594 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(SCWC-14-0000594; CAAP -14-0000594;  AB 2012-099 (2 -10-46361)  
AND SCWC-16-0000029; CAAP-16- 0000029; AB 2013- 250 (2-11-46922)) 
 
JUNE 30, 2020 
 
 RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WILSON, J. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This case concerns a workers’ compensation claim by an 
employee for an injury-by -disease stemming from his  exposure to Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000594
30-JUN-2020
08:12 AM*** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
2 pervasive mold in his work environment over a four
-year period 
and the subsequent breakdown of his health.  The employee,  
Jay D. Cadiz (“Cadiz ”), worked different jobs  at various Times 
Supermarket stores in different locations on O ʻahu for several 
years.  Cadiz then transferred to Times Supermarket in Kā ne‘ohe, 
owned by QSI, Inc. (“employer” ),1 where he worked for four years 
in the meat department as  a “meatcutter. ”  Prior to working at 
the Kāne‘ ohe store, Cadiz was healthy and exercising daily, 
including engaging in martial arts.  Shortly after moving to the 
Kāne‘ohe store in 2004, he “began to feel sick all the time.”   
Cadiz filed a workers’ compensa tion claim for injury-
by-disease, and the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board 
(“LIRAB”) rejected Cadiz’s  claim,2 concluding that the employer’s 
reports based on three Independent Medical Examinations ( “IME”) 
provided sufficient substantial evidence to overcome the 
statutory presumption in favor of compensability.  See Hawaiʻ i 
Revised Statutes ( “HRS”) § 386–85(1)(1984)  (“In any proceeding 
for the enforcement of a claim for compensation . . . it shall 
be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the 
contrary: (1) That the claim is for a covered work injury[.]”)   
                     
1  For ease of reference, QSI, Inc.’s insurance carrier, First 
Insurance Company of Hawaii, Ltd., also a party, is included in our use of 
the term “employer.”  
 
2 This brief summary simplifies and condenses a more complicated 
and extended process.  See section II below for a more detailed and accurate 
account.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
3 “When determining whether a worker’s compensation 
claim is work-related, it is well established in Hawai ʻi that ‘
it 
shall be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the 
contrary . . . [t]hat the claim is for a covered work injury[.] ’  
HRS § 386-85 (1993). ”  Panoke v. Reef Dev. of Hawaii, Inc., 136 
Hawaiʻi 448, 461, 363 P.3d 296, 309 (2015).  The presumption that  
a worker’s claimed  injury is “work-connected ” and therefore 
compensable is one of “the ‘keystone principles’  of our workers’  
compensation plan.”  Flor v. Holguin, 94 Hawaiʻi 70, 79, 9 P.3d 
382, 391 (2000).  That presumption is paramount, in part, 
because the workers’ compensation statute “provides an injured 
employee’ s exclusive remedy for an injury arising out of and in 
the course of employment.”   Ihara v. State Dep’t of Land & Nat. 
Res., 141 Hawaiʻi 36, 42, 404 P.3d 302, 308 (2017) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).  To rebut the 
presumption, the employer has the burden of going forward with 
the evidence, which is the burden of production, as well as the 
burden of persuasion; the burden of production means that the 
employer must initially introduce substantial evidence that, if 
true, could rebut the presumption t hat the injury is work-
related.  Panoke, 136 Hawaiʻi at 461, 363 P.3d at 309.  The 
burden of production means that the employer must initially 
introduce substantial evidence that, if true, could rebut the 
presumption that the injury is work-related.  Id.; s ee also,  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
4 Korsak v. Hawaii Permanente Med. Grp., 94 Hawai ʻi 297, 307, 12 
P.3d 1238, 1248 (2000)
 (“Hawaii’s workers ’ compensation
presumption places a heavy burden on the employer to disprove 
that an injury is work-related. . . .  HRS § 386– 85(1) creates a 
presumption in favor of the claimant that the subject injury is 
causally related to the employment activity .”  (citation 
omitted, first emphasis added)).  Substantial evidence is 
relevant and credible evidence of a quality and quantity 
sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable person that 
an injury or death is not work-connected.  Panoke 136 Hawai‘i at 
469, 363 P.3d at 317. 
If the employer meets the burden of production, the 
burden of persuasion requires that the trier of fact weigh the 
evidence elicited by the employer against the evidence elicited
by the claimant.  Id.  In evaluating whether the burden of 
persuasion has been met in the workers’ compensation  context, 
“the broad humanitarian purpose of the workers’ compensation  
statute read as a whole requires that all reasonable doubts be  
resolved in favor of the claimant .”  Van Ness v. State Dep’t of
Educ., 131 Hawaiʻi 545, 558, 319 P.3d 464, 477 (2014)
(citations
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted) .  
 
, 
For the reasons detailed more fully below, we hold the 
employer’s IME reports  failed to provide substantial evidence to 
meet its burden to produce evidence that, if true, would *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
5 (. . . continued) overcome the statutory presumption that the injury is work-
related.  As the employer failed to meet its burden of 
production, we do not reach the issue of whether the employer 
met its burden of persuasion.  Panoke  at 462, 363 P.3d at 310. 
Cadiz presented laboratory evidence of elevated levels 
of dangerous mycotoxins in his body.  That evidence was never 
rebutted by the employer’s IME reports.  Indeed, the employer’s 
IME reports never addressed the scientific evidence of elevated 
levels of mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body  in relation to the 
presumption in favor of compensability.  In addition, although 
the LIRAB’s decision and order included the boilerplate language  
that “all reasonable doubts have been resolved in  favor of 
Claimant,” in fact , the LIRAB failed to do so. 
Based on the laboratory evidence confirming elevated 
levels of harmful mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body,  and based on the 
employer ’s failure to meet its burden of production, we conclude 
that the employer failed to overcome the presumption in favor of 
compensability.  Accordingly, we vacate the ICA’s judgment on 
appeal and its Summary Disposition Order (“ SDO”), and we vacate 
the LIRAB’s decision and order in case number AB 2012-099 (2-10-
46361) (Cadiz I).   We remand to the LIRAB with the instruction3
3As our background section below narrates, this case was the 
subject of two different full de novo hearings before the LIRAB, which we 
designate Cadiz I and Cadiz II.  In the first, for  procedural reasons, Cadiz 
was not allowed to present the live testimony of his expert, Dr. Janette  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
6 that Cadiz’s injury -by-disease is compensable under Hawaiʻi’s 
workers’ compensation law and for proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
II. BACKGROUND 
After working different jobs  at various Times 
Supermarket stores in different locations for several years, Jay 
Cadiz transferred to the Times Supermarket in Kāne‘ohe.  He 
worked for four years in the Kāne‘ohe meat department as a 
meatcutter, working eight hours a day, five days a week, with 
approximately five hours of overtime per week.  According to 
Cadiz, prior to working at the Kāne‘ohe store, he was healthy and 
exercising daily.  He engaged in martial arts.   Shortly after 
moving to the Kāne ‘ohe store in approximately June 2004, he 
“began to feel sick all the time.”  The Kāne‘ohe store, he said, 
“was the first dirty store I worked in:  molds all over the 
walls, ceilings, lots of drain[s] with molds, caved in ceilings, 
crack[s] in ceilings.”     
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
Hope, on the various adverse health -related effects of mycotoxin exposure and 
inhalation.  In the second, Dr. Hope gave extensive live testimony, but the 
LIRAB disregarded that testimony for procedural reasons.  
   
As noted, we base our holding on the laboratory evidence 
confirming elevated levels of harmful mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body presented in 
Cadiz I (albeit in abbreviated form), and we base it, as well,  on the 
requirement in Hawai‘ i’s workers’ compensation law that all reasonable doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the claimant.  Because our holding rests on 
those bases, it is unnecessary to address the merits of the LIRAB’s 
procedural determinations in Cadiz II.   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
7 According to Cadiz , the mold covered “all the fans, 
the AC fans, the left side wall was just covered in black mold 
and the right side of the wall, near the cutting table, it was 
just black; like pitch black mold just eating up the walls and 
ceiling,” as well as the storage room.  The ceiling of the meat 
department was always wet.  Twice, the ceiling fell into the 
meat department when it rained.  The first time the ceiling fell 
was in early August 2004, a few months after he began working at 
the Kā
ne‘ohe store .  
After a few months of  working in this environment, 
Cadiz began experiencing “breathing problems, asthma attacks, 
sinus infections, and debilitating headaches,” as well as 
dizziness and vertigo.  Four of the other workers in the meat 
department at the time also complained of breathing difficulties 
and other ailments.  Beginning in 2007, Cadiz took extensive 
leaves for illness, and he finally resigned from his job as a 
meatcutter towards the end of 2008.   
For the five years prior to working at the Kāne
‘ohe 
Times store, Cadiz averaged eight visits to a doctor or 
emergency room per year, including visits relating to a 
concussion he received while performing martial arts.  While 
working in the meat department, he saw a physician or received 
emergency treatment on average of twenty
-six times per year.  
From August 31, 2007, when he experienced heart palpitations, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
8 through the end of 2007, Cadiz sought treatment from medical 
personnel or social workers 
forty-three times.   
Cadiz brought an initial claim for workers’ 
compensation in September
 2010.  In the space on the claim form 
reserved for a response to “ describe how accident occurred,” he 
indicated that the accident occurred when he was working at the 
Kāne‘ohe Times Supermarket and was “exposed to black mold” over 
four years in his work at the meat department.  In the space on 
the claim form reserved for a response to “d escribe 
injury/illness,” he responded:   “Headaches, dizziness, 
respiratory problems, memory problems, vision, skin problems, 
anxiety.”  Cadiz brought an “amended claim” for workers’ 
compensation benefits in November 2011, based largely on the 
same set of facts but this time claiming “exposure to mold” 
generally, and alleging “additional injuries.”   The description 
of the illness in the amended claim expanded to “headaches, 
respiratory illnesses, cognitive impairment, psychological 
injury, chronic rhinitis/sinusitis, vertigo, tinnitus, 
palpitations, sleep disturbance, myalgia, GERD, gastritis, 
urinary frequency, dysuria, malaise, fatigue.”   
In October 2011, Dr. Myles Suehiro ordered a urine 
test from RealTime Laboratories 
on behalf of Cadiz in order to 
detect the presence of any mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body.  Cadiz 
tested positive for elevated levels of two mycotoxins ; *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
9 (. . . continued) ochratoxin and trichothecene
.  Mycotoxins are toxins generated 
by molds or fungi.  According to a RealTime Laboratories article 
cited by both parties : 
The negative health effects of mycotoxins are a function of 
the concentration, the duration of exposure and the 
individual’s sensitivities.   The concentrations experienced 
in a normal home, office, or school are often too low to 
trigger a health response in occupants.  However, 
concentrations experienced in a home or building which has 
experienced water leaks are often high enough to trigger 
health responses in the occupants.  
   
Trichothecenes are mycotoxins generated by different fungi, 
including Stachybotrys chartarum (“Stachybotrys ”).  According to 
the same source, “ [t]heir mechanism of action is the inhibition 
of protein synthesis, therefore they are known to kill cells and 
are extremely dangerous.”  In addition, “w hen Stachybotrys grows 
in a mold infested building, the organism produces trichothecene 
mycotoxins.  It is also known that these toxins can get into the 
air where they can be inhaled.”  Different variations of 
trichothecene mycotoxins “are strongly toxic compounds.”   
Pursuant to HRS § 386- 79 (1996), the employer 
designated and paid two physicians and one psychologist to 
examine Cadiz and produce independent medical examinations.4  
                     
 4 In the workers’ compensation context, the word “independent,” in 
the phrase “independent medical examination,” can be something of a misnomer.  
A physician who performs an “independent medical examination” has been 
selected by the employer and paid for by the employer.  HRS § 386 -79(a) 
(“After an injury and during the period of disability, the employee, whenever 
ordered by the director of labor and industrial relations, shall submit to 
examination, at reasonable times and places, by a duly qualified physician or 
surgeon designated and paid by the employer.”)  The examining physician is  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
10 Cadiz was examined by Dr. Leonard Cupo on January 11, 2011.  Dr. 
Cupo produced an IME on November 12, 2011.  Cadiz was examined 
by psychologist Dr. 
Roger Likewise on January 10, 2011.  Dr. 
Likewise produced an  independent psychological examination 
(referred to below for convenience as an IME) on November 18, 
2011.   
Finally, Cadiz was examined by Dr. Ajit Arora for one 
and a half hours on October 29, 2012.  Only three days later, 
Dr. Arora produced a 407
-page, single- spaced IME report, 
including appendices and synopses of articles in the medical and 
toxicological literature.  Appendix B, for example, ran from 
page 360 to 385 of Dr. Arora’s report.  It included  a list of 
the titles of 51 articles dealing with mold and related health 
issues in humans.  The most recent of those articles was from 
2002, 10 years prior to the IME.  Appendix B also included 
abstracts of various articles relating to mold, mycotoxins, and 
toxicology, none more recent than 2
002.  Appendix B also 
included various excerpts from the American College of 
Occupational Environmental Medicine (“ACOEM”) relating to toxic 
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
“independent” in the sense that she cannot be the claimant’s personal  
physician, and the examination is “independent” in the sense that no 
physician- patient relationship is created between the physician -examiner and 
the employee as a result of the examination.  See  61 Am. Jur. 2d Physicians, 
Surgeons, Etc. § 273 (“When an employer retains a physician to examine its 
employees, generally, no physician -patient relationship exists between the 
employee and the doctor[.]”)  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
11 mold, including excerpts concerning a particularly dangerous 
toxic mold whose scientific name is Stachybotrys .  The excerpts 
from the ACOEM are also from 2002.   
Dr. Cupo’s IME report itemized 16 of Cadiz’s symptoms 
under the heading “Diagnoses.”  For each symptom, Dr. Cupo wrote 
the same refrain, repeated 16 times: X symptom was “not caused, 
aggravated, or accelerated by job activities as a meat cutter 
for Times Supermarket.”  According to Dr. Cupo, Cadiz had not 
tested positive for an allergy to mold but had tested positive 
for an allergy to dust mites.  Thus, Cadiz’s rhinosinusitis, 
chronic headaches, recurrent shortness of breath, etc., all were 
“medically plausibly explainable by other medical conditions” 
without needing to resort to toxic mold exposure.   
According to Dr. Likewise , Cadiz suffered from 
“hypochondriacal preoccupations,” chronic somatization, 
generalized anxiety disorder, or chronic panic attacks, and 
dependent personality disorder.  Dr. Likewise does not appear to 
have offered any suggestion as to which of Cadiz’s multiple 
symptoms were psychosomatic and which were not.  Rather, his 
report gives the impression that, apart from allergies, they all 
might be psychosomatic. 
According to Dr. Arora, Cadiz’s headaches, dizziness, 
nausea, chronic rhinitis, sinusitis, and asthma could be 
“explained by chronic anxiety and panic disorder” through the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
12 mechanism of “hyperventilation.”  On the subject of mold, Dr. 
Arora opined that the
 
black mold of concern has been Stachybotrys chartarum, which does 
not grow on walls and ceilings.  It is a fastidious mold that 
only grows above the ceilings in dark and on wooden beams in 
attics.  The black mold that grows in the lighted areas on walls 
or ceilings is Cladosporium, which is a relatively benign mold, 
causing only allergies.  
 
Dr. Arora opined that spore counts are the proper measure of 
mold toxicity.  According to him, if the meat department at 
Times “was the worst building ever described in the United 
States, then one would not anticipate more than 1700 spores of 
Stachybotrys per cubic meter.  That will not be sufficient to 
cause toxicity from inhalation.”   
Materials inc luded in Dr. Arora’s IME report included 
an abstract of an article stating that in one study, “evidence 
was found of a relationship between high levels of inhalation 
exposure or direct contact to mycotoxin- containing molds or 
mycotoxins and demonstrable . . . health effects in humans[ .]”  
Nonetheless, according to the abstract, the then- current 
literature (2002) did not provide “compelling evidence that 
exposure at levels expected in most mold- contaminated indoor 
environments is likely to result in measurable health effects.”  
Still, the abstract from the article cautioned that “ the point 
at which mold contamination becomes a threat to health is 
unknown.”  (E mphasis added. ) *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
13 In Appendix B to his IME report, Dr. Arora himself 
testified to the adverse health consequences of mycotoxins.  He 
wrote, for example, of the “[t] oxic effects from mycotoxins  
produced by certain fungal species.  This may include disruption 
of cellular function, alteration of immune competence, and 
cytotoxic effects with DNA damage and mutations resulting in 
cancer such as with aflatoxins.”  In addition, Dr. Arora wr ote 
that “exposure to mycotoxins at toxic levels can cause illness  
. . . in humans and animals.”  Finally, Dr. Arora characterized  
trichothecenes, one of the mycotoxins verified by laboratory 
results to be present at elevated levels in Cadiz’s body :  
“Trichothecenes are the most widely studied mycotoxins. . . . 
Trichothecenes are potent inhibitors of protein synthesis in 
eukaryotic cells, particularly in rapidly proliferating tissues.  
This property has led to their use as biological weapons.”  
Other than these relatively generic mentions of trichothecenes
 
in Appendix B of his IME report, Dr. Arora never specifically 
discusses trichothecenes in relation to Cadiz.  That is, in his 
IME report, Dr. Arora never discusses the laboratory results 
proving that Cadiz had elevated levels of 
trichothecenes in his 
body.5  
                     
5  Appendix B to Dr. Arora’s IME report appears to be from a 
presentation Arora made to a different audience at some point prior to the 
IME.  One indication of this is that there is no mention of Cadiz in Appendix 
B (other than in the “Re:” line at the top of each page).  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
14 A.  Proceedings before the Director and the LIRAB in Cadiz I   
 (LIRAB Case No. AB 2012- 099) 
Cadiz’s September 3, 2010 claim f or injury -by-disease 
was the subject of a hearing before the director on December 1, 
2011.  The director ruled that the claim was not time-barred but 
nevertheless denied the claim for compensation on the basis that 
the record revealed “an absence of empirical evidence confirming 
that claimant’s worksite contained black mold.”  The director 
concluded that “claimant’s claimed injury was not the result of 
exposure to purported black mold at work,” and therefore 
concluded that Cadiz “did not suffer an injury on 8/31/2007 
arising out of and in the course of his employment.”  Cadiz 
appealed the director’s decision to the LIRAB for a full de novo 
hearing on his claim.  See  HRS § 386- 87(b) (“The appellate board 
shall hold a full hearing de novo on the appeal. ”).   
Prior to the de novo hearing, the Board refused to 
allow Dr. Janette Hope to give live testimony because Cadiz’s 
attorney had not named her as a live witness by the relevant 
deadlines in the Board’s pre -trial order.  The Board excluded 
Dr. Hope’s detailed declaration apparently for the same reason.   
The only evidence from Dr. Hope allowed by the Board appears to 
have been her two-
page opinion letter dated November 16, 2011.  
In that letter, after having reviewed medical records and 
symptom summaries concerning  Cadiz, Dr. Hope observed that “Mr. *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
15 Cadiz experienced a marked decli ne in his health starting in 
2007 resulting in numerous physician, specialist and urgent care 
visits for a multitude of symptoms which are most likely 
attributable to his exposure to a severely water damaged/moldy 
workplace.”  She connected this assessment  of the “likely” cause 
of his varied symptoms with the laboratory results of his 
mycotoxin exposure.  “Mr. Cadiz shows elevations in ochratoxin 
and trichothecene mycotoxins on urine mycotoxin testing which 
likely resulted from his exposure to a severely water 
damaged/moldy workplace and contributed to his numerous health 
complaints including respiratory, gastro- intestinal, urologic 
and immune system complaints.”  She stated that, “In addition, 
he shows evidence of immune system dysfunction as well as 
abnormalities on pulmonary function testing consistent with his 
exposure.”   
The hearing was held on June 14, 2013 and June 17, 
2013, and the Board issued its decision and order on March 10, 
2014.  In its decision and order, the Board made extensive 
findings of fact.  The Board found, inter alia , that Cadiz had 
presented evidence “ that mold was present in the area of 
Claimant’s work  environmen t during the period in question” and 
that Cadiz was exposed to the mold.  The Board found that Cadiz 
does not have an allergy to Stachybotrys, the black mold that 
according to Dr. Arora is “of concern,” but Cadiz was allergic *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
16 to dust mites.  In addition, the Board found that the Mycotoxin 
Panel Report documented the presence of ochratoxin and 
trichothecene in Cadiz’s body.   
The Board made various findings of fact concerning 
Cadiz’s multiple symptoms, including recitations of the 
conclusions of Drs. Cupo, Arora, and Likewise.  The Board’s 
recitations of the employer’s IME reports centered on the fact 
that they had provided possible alternative explanations for 
Cadiz’s symptoms that were not mold-related and therefore were 
evidence that his injury- by-disease was not work -connected.  In 
Dr. Cupo’s words, Cadiz’s “symptoms were easily and medically 
plausibly explainable by other medical conditions” without the 
need to resort to explanations based on exposure to mold.   
On the issue of the compensability of Cadiz’s 
illnesses, the Board stated that it would apply the unitary test 
as then-recently articulated by Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi 
at 560, 319 
P.3d at 476.  The Board started with the presumption in favor of 
compensability, but it determined that the employer had 
presented substantial evidence to rebut that presumption.  Once 
over the hurdle of the presumption, the Board “weighed th e 
evidence by Employer against that presented by Claimant” on the 
evidence relating to causation.  
 
The Board found the “medical opinions” presented by 
Dr. Hope and another doctor on behalf of Cadiz “severely lacking *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
17 (. . . continued) in quality to justify their conclusions ,” stating that Dr. Hope 
and the other doctor “appeared to accept Claimant’s hypothesis 
with only cursory medical data.”  In contrast, the Board found 
Drs. Cupo, Likewise, and Arora to have “provided a sufficient 
degree of specificity to rebut the presumption of 
compensability.”  The Board credited their opinions, and 
accordingly concluded that Cadiz did not sustain a personal 
injury arising out of and in the course of employment.   
The Board made no findings or conclusions on what 
exactly it found persuasive i
n the evidence provided by Drs. 
Cupo, Likewise, and Arora, other than to suggest that they had 
examined and treated Cadiz, whereas there was no indication of 
“what medical data” Dr. Hope had relied on “to form an opinion 
regarding causation” of Cadiz’s condition.  The Board made no 
findings or conclusions concerning what, if any, doubts it 
resolved in favor of the claimant.  The Board made no findings 
or conclusions on the elevated levels of mycotoxins verified to 
have been absorbed by Cadiz’s body, other than to note the bare 
results of the laboratory test.  The Board made no findings or 
conclusions on whether or how the employer’s IME reports 
disproved the work- connection between Cadiz’s illnesses and the 
pervasive mold in the meat department.6  The Board appears to 
                     
6 The Board found as fact that the employer failed to present “any 
evidence that contradicts the presence of the alleged black mold at the  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
18 have simply accepted the IME reports’ suggestion that other 
medical causes could “medically plausibly” explain Cadiz’s 
illnesses and then concluded that the work-connection issue 
therefore tipped towards the employer.  
B.  Proceedings before the Director and the LIRAB in Cadiz II  
 (LIRAB Case No. AB 2013- 250) in which Dr. Hope provided  
 live testimony previously excluded by the Board 
Cadiz’s November 15, 2011  claim f or injury -by-disease 
was the subject of a hearing before the director on April 30, 
2013 (Cadiz II).  The director r uled on June 27, 2013, that the 
claim was an attempt to circumvent the director’s prior decision 
for the same injury.  On July 11, 2013, Cadiz appealed the 
director’s decision in Cadiz II  to the LIRAB for a full de novo 
hearing on his claim.  The LIRAB issued  a pre-trial order on 
January 31, 2014, stating  that the “sole issue to be determined 
is whether Claimant sustained a personal injury on November 14, 
2011, arising out of and  in the course of employment.”  The full 
de novo evidentiary hearing before the Board was held on August 
26, August 27, and September 26, 2014.  In Cadiz II , Dr. Hope’s 
detailed declaration concerning mycotoxin exposure through mold 
inhalation and resulting ill- health, along with its multiple 
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
workplace” and that “mold was present in the area of Claimant’s work 
environment during the period in question.”  In addition, the Board further 
found “that Claimant was exposed to such mold.”  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
19 exhibits, was admitted.  In addition, Dr. Hope provided 
extensive live testimony.  
Having heard and admitted this testimony by Dr. Hope 
into the record, the Board ’s resulting order and decision in 
Cadiz II made no findings or conclusions with respect to Dr. 
Hope’s extensive testimony.  The decision and order in Cadiz II  
simply vacated the underlying decision of the director in Cadiz 
II, effectively terminating the proceedings, without remanding 
to the director for any further findings or conclusions 
concerning the newly admitted testimony of Dr. Hope.  I n other 
words, in spite of its pretrial order governing the scope of the 
Cadiz II hearing —the order stating that “the sole issue to be 
determined on this appeal is whether Claimant sustained a 
personal injury on November 14, 2011, arising out of and in the 
course of employment”— the Board made no findings or conclusions 
on the testimony admitted into evidence concerning the sole 
issue on appeal to the Board in Cadiz II.  Instead of  rendering 
a decision as to whether Cadiz sustained an injury -by-disease 
that was work-connected, or interpreting the newly- admitted 
testimony of Dr. Hope in light of that question, the Board 
concluded that in Cadiz I , it had rejected Cadiz’s initial claim  
for work-related injury of September 3, 2010 as time-barred and 
had instead based its order and decision in Cadiz I  on the 
November 21, 2011 claim.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
20 Thus, the Board in Cadiz II decided that it had 
already addressed the same claim in Cadiz I , concluding that 
“the November 21, 2 011 claim was not a new or subsequent claim 
for compensation, but an amended claim for an industrial injury 
by disease that was before the Director and decided by the Board 
in Cadiz I[.]”  However, rather than take into account the 
significant newly-admitted testimony of Dr. Hope bearing 
directly on the work-connectedness of Cadiz’s injury -by-disease 
claim, the Board ignored Dr. Hope’s extensive testimony.  That 
is to say, the Board ’s decision and order in Cadiz II  never 
mentions Dr. Hope’s extensive testimony, admitted into the 
record in Cadiz II, concerning (a) the nature and harmfulness of 
exposure to mycotoxins, (b) the sometimes complex array of 
symptoms that can be generated by exposure to mycotoxins, or (c) 
the fact that Cadiz’s multiple symptoms match what she has 
repeatedly seen in her treatment of patients exposed to 
mycotoxins.   
C.  Proceedings before the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) 
Cadiz filed a notice of appeal of the Board’s decision 
in Cadiz I wit h the ICA on March 21, 2014.  Cadiz filed a notice 
of appeal of the Board’s decision in Cadiz II with the ICA on 
January 20, 2016.  The ICA consolidated the appeals of Cadiz I  
and Cadiz II on December 15, 2016.  On March 31, 2017, the ICA 
issued its SDO in the combined appeals.  Cadiz v. QSI, Inc., *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
21 Nos. CAAP-14 -0000594 and CAAP-16-0000029, 2017 WL 119 4168 (App. 
March 31, 2017) (SDO).   
The ICA’s SDO affirmed the LIRAB’s decision and order 
dated March 10, 2014 in Cadiz I , which ruled that Cadiz had not 
sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment.  The ICA also affirmed the LIRAB’s December 22, 2015 
decision and order in Cadiz II  vacating the director’s decision.   
Cadiz, Id.  at *8.   
The ICA began by addressing Cadiz’s claim that the 
Board had failed to properly apply the presumption in favor of 
compensability.  The ICA reviewed the relevant law providing 
that the presumption can only be overcome by the employer 
producing substantial evidence that the injury- by-disease “is 
unrelated to employment.”  Id. at *2 (quoting Akamine v. 
Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408 , 495 P.2d 1164, 
1165 (1972) ).  The ICA also drew attention to this court’s 
conclusion in Van Ness that the employer had “failed to present  
substantial evidence to overcome the presumption that the 
aggravation of [claimant’s] asthma was an injury ‘by disease 
proximately caused by’ his employment.”  Id. at *3 (quoting Van 
Ness, 133 Hawai ʻi 
at 565, 319 P.3d at 484). 
The ICA next highlighted the conclusions of the IME 
reports of Dr. Cupo and Dr. Arora.  Specifically, the ICA quoted 
with approval Dr. Cupo’s assertion that Cadiz’s multiple *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
22 symptoms were “ easily and medically plausibly explainable” by 
medical conditions other than exposure to toxic mold.   Id.  It 
also quoted Dr. Arora’s assertion that Stachybotrys  does not 
grow on walls and ceilings, implying that it could not have been 
the kind of mold conspicuous on the ceiling in the Kāne‘ohe meat 
department.  In addition, the ICA found helpful Dr. Arora’s 
assertions regarding the low probability of any toxic effect 
from inhalation of mycotoxins, given the high spore count that 
would be required.  Id. at *3-4.  According to the ICA, “Drs. 
Cupo and Arora also provided alternative explanations for 
Claimant’s allergic rhinitis, GERD, and anxiety.”   Id. at *4.  
The ICA explained that Drs. Cupo and Arora in their reports 
“explained why mold exposure could not have caused or aggravated 
Claimant’s injuries, and did not provide mere generalized 
medical opinions.”   Id.  The ICA also dwelled at length on Dr. 
Likewise’s psychological report.  Id. at *4-5.   
The ICA concluded that the IME reports provided the 
requisite “substantial evidence” to rebut the presumption of 
compensability through providing alternative explanations of 
Cadiz’s symptoms and illnesses.  In particular, the ICA seemed 
impressed by the “su bstantial evidence of a high degree of 
specificity, quantity, and quality that Claimant did not have a 
mold allergy and that Claimant’s conditions were not otherwise 
caused by exposure to mold in the workplace.”  Id. at *5.  The *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
23 ICA specifically rejected Cadiz’s suggestion that the LIRAB 
erred in crediting Dr. Likewise’s opinion.  Id. at *6. 
Cadiz argued to the ICA that the LIRAB in Cadiz I 
erred in excluding Dr. Hope’s declaration, her credentials, and  
various other materials relating to past professional complaints 
and administrative actions against Dr. Arora .  Dr. Hope’ s 
declaration and other material s excluded from Cadiz I  seem to 
have been excluded by the LIRAB based on Cadiz’s failure to meet 
discovery deadlines.  Cadiz, Id. at *6-7; (noting that the ICA 
was “not able to properly review what was presented before the 
LIRAB [in Cadiz I] as there are no transcripts of the June 14, 
2013 and June 17, 2013 hearing in the record.  Nevertheless, 
upon review of the LIRAB’ s March 10, 2014 Decision and Order, it 
appears that the LIRAB excluded Exhibits A- l, B, and FF, because 
the exhibits were not timely submitted. ”). 7  The ICA found that 
admission or exclusion of evidence is generally in the 
discretion of the officials conducting an administrative 
hearing, and the LIRAB properly excluded exhibits and other 
evidence as untimely.  Id. at *7.  In addition, the ICA noted 
that it was “not able to properly review what was presented 
before the LIRAB” in Cadiz II  because the transcripts from that 
                     
7 Exhibit A -1 consisted of Dr. Hope’s 5 -page declaration; exhibit B 
was her 6- page curriculum vitae; and exhibit FF consisted of a series of 
articles critical of Dr. Arora as well as references to various complaints 
and/or administrative actions against him.   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
24 hearing were not in the record.  Id. at *8.  Finally, the ICA 
affirmed the LIRAB’s decision and order in both Cadiz I and 
Cadiz II.  Id. a t *9.  Cadiz applied for a writ of certiorari, 
and we accepted his application.   
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A.  Appeals from Agency Determinations Relating to Workers’  
 Compensation  
Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by 
the provisions of Hawai
‘i Administrative Procedures Act ( “HAPA”) 
relating to judicial review of agency action.  HRS § 91-
14(g)(1993); Bocalbos v. Kapiolani Med. Ctr. for Women & 
Children, 93 Hawai ʻi 116, 123, 997 P.2d 42, 49 (App. 2000).  
Under HAPA’s judicial review  provisions,  
the reviewing court “may affirm the decision of the agency 
or remand the case with instructions for further 
proceedings.”  Id.  The reviewing court also “may reverse 
or modify the decision and order if the substantial rights 
of the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders” 
(1) violate provisions of the constitution or a statute, 
(2) are beyond the agency’s statutory authority or 
jurisdiction, (3) used “unlawful procedure,” (4) were 
“[a]ffected by other error of law,” (5) were clearly 
erroneous, or (6) were arbitrary or capricious “or 
characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion.”  HRS § 91 -14(g)(1)- (6).   
 
Ihara, 141 Hawai ʻi at 41, 404 P.3d at 307.
  
  “The LIRAB ’s conclusions of law are reviewed de 
novo, under the right/wrong standard.  Its findings of fact 
‘are reviewable under the clearly erroneous standard to 
determine if the agency decision was clearly erroneous in *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
25 view of reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on 
the whole record.
’” 
 Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi at 558, 319 P.3d 
at 477 (citation omitted).  Like any agency findings, the 
LIRAB’s “findings should be ‘sufficient to allow the 
reviewing court to track the steps by which the agency 
reached its decision.’”  Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning 
Comm’n of Cty. of Kauai , 133 Hawaiʻ i 141, 164, 324 P.3d 951, 
974 (2014) (citation omitted). 
B.  Statutory Interpretation 
 “Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo.”   Ryan v. Herzog, 142 Hawai ʻi 278, 284, 418
P.3d 619, 625 (2018)
 (citation omitted).  The Hawaiʻi workers’ 
compensation statute must be “construed . . . liberally” in 
order to effect its “beneficent purposes.”  Puchert v. Agsalud,
67 Haw. 25, 36, 677 P.2d 449, 457 (1984).  
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
We begin with a brief overview of the law governing 
workers’ compensation in Hawaiʻi and
 then apply those principles 
to the decisions below.   
A.  Principles Governing Hawai ʻi Workers’ Compensation Law  
  The 
Hawaiʻi workers’ compensation statute “ is social 
legislation that is to be interpreted broadly. ”  Davenport v. 
City & Cty. of Honolulu, Honolulu Fire Dep ’t, 100 Hawai ʻi 481, *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
26 491, 60 P.3d 882, 892 (2002).  The provisions of the Hawaiʻi 
workers’ compensation law “ are highly remedial in character.
  
Their paramount purpose is to provide compensation for an 
employee for all work-connected injuries, regardless of 
questions of negligence and proximate cause. ”  Flor, 94 Hawaiʻi 
at 79, 9 P.3d at 391 (emphasis added).  The overarching policy 
of workers’ compensation in this state is that “an employee 
should be indemnified for all infirmities resulting from [their]  
employment.”  Van Ness, 131 Hawaiʻ i at 559, 319 P.3d at 478 
(citation omitted); Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawaiʻ i 1, 5, 919 
P.2d 263, 267 (1996) (stating that the workers’ compensation
statute provides “an injured employee’ s exclusive remedy for an 
injury arising out of and in the course of employment. ”).  
“Under our workers’ compensation statute, the slightest 
aggravation or acceleration of an injury by the employment 
activity mandates compensation.”   Korsak, 94 Hawaiʻ i at 305, 12 
P.3d at 1246.
The workers’ compensation statute rests on  the 
presumption that a claimed injury is work- connected and 
therefore compensable.  HRS § 386– 85 (1993) (“In any proceeding 
for the enforcement of a claim for compensation . . . it shall 
be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the 
contrary: (1) That the claim is for a covered work injury[.]”) ;
Panoke, 136 Hawai ‘i at 461, 363 P. 3d at 309 (“ When determining *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
27 whether a workers’  compensation claim is work-related, it is 
well established in Hawai‘i that ‘ it shall be presumed, in the 
absence of substantial evidence to the contrary
 . . . [t]hat the
claim is for a covered work injury[.]” ).  “The presumption has  
been described as one of the ‘keystone principles’ of our 
workers’ compensation plan.”   Flor, 94 Hawaiʻi at 79, 9 P.3d at 
391 (citation omitted).  It is the burden of the employer to 
produce substantial evidence that, if true, could rebut the  
presumption that the injury is work-related.  Panoke, 136 Hawaiʻi
at 461, 363 P.3d 296 at 309.  Once the burden of production is 
met, the burden of persuasion requires that “the trier of fact . 
. . weigh the evidence elicited by the employer against the 
evidence elicited by the claimant.”  Id.  In evaluating whether 
the burden of persuasion has been met, the “broad humanitarian 
purpose of the workers ’ compensation statute  read as a whole 
requires that all reasonable doubts be resolved in favor of the 
claimant.”  Ihara, 141 Hawaiʻi at 41, 404 P.3d at 307 (citation  
omitted).   
 
Disputes concerning the validity of claims for  
compensation under Hawai ʻi’s
 workers’ compensation l aw are
 
initially decided by the director of Labor and Industrial 
Relations.  HRS § 386-86(a)-(b).  The director conducts a 
hearing on the claim and issues findings of fact and conclusions 
of law.  Id.  The decision of the director may be *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
28 administratively appealed to the LIRAB, which conducts a trial-
like hearing on the appeal de novo.  HRS § 386- 87(a)-(c).  A 
LIRAB decision may be appealed directly to the I CA.  HRS § 386-
73.5; HRS § 386 -88.  Because any appeal from a determination of
the director receives a full hearing de novo from the LIRAB, 
this court reviews only the decisions of the LIRAB and not the 
decisions of the director.  
B. The Board and the ICA E rred by M isapplying  the Presumption
in Favor of Compensability.
 As noted, Hawaiʻi’s worke rs’ compensation law begins 
with the explicit statutory presumption that a claimed injury is 
work-related and therefore compensa
ble.  HRS § 386– 85(1).  To 
rebut that presumption in favor of compensability, the employer 
bears the heavy burden of producing substantial evidence 
disproving that the injury is work connected.  Korsak, 94 Hawaiʻi 
at 307, 12 P.3d at 1248 ( “Hawaii’s workers ’ compensation 
presumption places a heavy burden on the employer to disprove  
that an injury is work- related. . . .  HRS § 386 –85(1) creates a 
presumption in favor of the claimant that the subject injury is 
causally related to the employment activity .” (citation omitted, 
first emphasis added)).  
Thus, the “substantial evidence” sufficient to 
overcome the presumption in favor of compensability must 
disprove the causal relation of the injury-by -disease to the *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
29 (. . . continued) conditions and incidents of claimant’s employment , and not 
merely suggest plausible alternative explanations.  “In 
evaluating whether the burden of producing substantial evidence
has been met, ‘the slightest aggravation or acceleration of an 
injury by the employment activity mandates compensation.’”   
Panoke, 136 Haw aiʻi at 461, 363 P.3d at  309; see also V an Ness,
131 Hawaiʻi at 561, 319 P.3d at 480  (“The relevant issue under 
the unitary or ‘work -connection approach’  is simply whether 
there is a causal connection between the injury and any 
incidents or conditions of employment [.]”).   
 
1. The LIRAB and the ICA failed to produce substantial
evidence 
that, if true, could disprove the presumption
of compensability in Cadiz I.
The presumption in favor of compensability “ signals 
and reflects a strong legislative policy favoring awards in 
arguable cases.”  Lawhead v. United Air Lines, 59 Haw. 551, 560, 
584 P.2d 119, 125 (1978) (citation omitted).  
Here, the three IME reports offered by the employer in Cadiz I  
regarding the claima nt’s exposure to mycotoxins  did not meet the 
burden of production of showing that Cadiz’s injury -by-disease 
was not work-related.  The IME reports (a) arrived at mutually 
inconsistent results,8 and (b) failed to mention, much less
8To mention only a few examples, Dr. Likewise in his IME report 
asserts “there is no clear medical explanation for [Cadiz’s] symptoms,” and 
therefore concludes that many or perhaps all of Cadiz’s symptoms were  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
30 directly address , the laboratory tests that objectively p roved 
the elevated presence of harmful mycotoxin s in Cadiz’s body.   
 Cadiz’s illnesses and symptoms reasonably appear to be  
work-connected.  See id., (stating that “ an injury is 
compensable if it reasonably appears to have resulted from the 
working conditions. ”).  The verified presence of harmful 
mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body, correlated with the  dramatically 
increased frequency of his visits to the doctor and the 
emergency room during the relevant period, together with the 
pervasive moldy conditions of the meat department, make Cadiz’s 
claimed injury- by-disease reasonably appear to be  work-connected  
and therefore compensable.   Id.  The employer did not meet its 
burden of producing substantial  evidence that, if true, could 
rebut the presumption that Cadiz ’s injury was work- related.  
Moreover, the LIRAB in Cadiz I , and the ICA in reviewing the 
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
psychosomatic, hypochondriacal, or due to a personality disorder.  Dr. Cupo,  
on the other hand, concludes that “chronic allergic rhinosinusitis with   
sensitivity to dust mites and chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease have 
been definitively established.”   However, Dr. Cupo concludes that Cadiz’s 
“symptoms can in no way be explained by exposure to mold” at Times 
Supermarket because allergy skin testin g of Cadiz “revealed positivity only 
to dust mites and negativity to molds.”  Dr. Cupo’s assumption that allergy 
to mold is the only possible mechanism by which ill -health is related to 
environmental mold is contradicted by parts of Dr. Arora’s IME report.   Dr. 
Arora’s report describes a scientific article which focuses not on allergies 
to mold as the mechanism for adverse health effects but on “epidemiological 
studies from the primary literature concerning inhalation of mycotoxins or 
potentially toxin- producing molds.”  The article’s review of those studies 
indicated that “evidence was found of a relationship between high levels of 
inhalation exposure or direct contact to mycotoxin -containing molds or 
mycotoxins and demonstrable . . . health effects in huma ns,” although the 
article does not find the evidence “compelling.”   
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
31 (. . . continued) Board’s decision and order , exclusively relied  on three IME 
reports that themselves fail to consider  or in any way account 
for the evidence of harmful mycotoxins present in Cadiz’s body 
(admitted into evidence in Cadiz I ).9  Finally, even if the cause 
                     
9  The Board did find as fact, “A Mycotoxin Panel Report Form dated 
October 27, 2011 documented the presence of ochratoxin of 4.2 [parts per  
billion (“ ppb”)] and trichothecene at 0.39 ppb” in Cadiz’s urine.  But the  
Board did not note that according to the Panel Report, each of those results 
is twice the level of detection.  In addition, the Board provided no further 
context in its decision and order for those quantitative levels of 
mycotoxins.   
 
It is true that the Board in Cadiz I  had excluded Dr. Hope’s 
declaration, which provided the relevant medical and toxicological context 
for the particular levels of those specific mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body.  The 
levels revealed by lab oratory testing are “elevated levels.”  Any level above 
the “detection level” represents “the mycotoxin presence in the persons 
exposed to indoor mold compared to those unexposed”; and “the elevated levels 
of these mycotoxins” detected in Cadiz “can cause the type of symptoms 
experienced by Mr. Cadiz such as a burning sensation of the mouth, esophagus 
and stomach and may also impair brain function . . . .  Both of these toxins 
can also cause depression of the immune system which could lead to flu -like 
symptoms such as rhinitis, headache, and dizziness.”  However, similar 
information was provided in Dr. Hope’s opinion letter dated November 16, 
2011, which was admitted in Cadiz I.  In that letter, after a review of 
portions of Cadiz’s medical history, Dr. Hope opined that Cadiz’s  
 
multiple symptoms. . . are most likely attributable to his 
exposure to a severely water damaged/moldy workplace.  Mr. 
Cadiz shows elevations in ochrat oxin and trichothecene  
mycotoxins . . . which likely resulted from this exposure 
to a severely water damaged/moldy workplace and contributed 
to his numerous health complaints including respiratory, 
gastrointestinal, urologic and immune system complaints.  
In addition, he shows evidence of immune system dysfunction 
as well as abnormalities on pulmonary function testing 
consistent with his exposure.  
 
Yet, the Board chose to credit the IME reports of the employer over Dr. 
Hope’s opinion letter on this crucial issue, even though the employer’s IME 
reports never addressed  the presence of those mycotoxins at those levels in 
Cadiz’s body.  The Board stated it resolved reasonable doubts in favor of the 
claimant, but it failed to address that the employer had failed to meet its 
burden of producing substantial evidence to overcome the presumption that 
Cadiz's injury was work -related.  
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
32 of the injury-by-disease is unknown, that in itself is a salient 
indication that the employer 
did not produce substantial 
evidence to meet its burden of production.  As we noted in Van 
Ness,  
[A doctor ’s opinion] that it was impossible to determine 
the cause of the aggravation does not constitute 
substantial evidence rebutting the presumption.  On the 
contrary, pursuant to Akamine, doubt as to the cause of the 
injury represents a salient index of the absence of 
substantial evidence  required to overcome the presumption 
that the claim is compensable.”    
 
Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi at 564, 319 P.3d at 483.  (citation and 
quotation marks omitted).  An excerpt contained in Dr. Arora’s 
own IME report in the present case, credited by the Board, 
acknowledges that “the point at which mold contamination becomes 
a threat to health is unknown . (Emphasis added.) 
2.  The LIRA B and the ICA in Cadiz I mistakenly   
 characterized the employer’s IME reports as substantial    
 evidence rebutting the presumption in favor of  
 compensability.  
 
In the workers ’ compensation context, “substantial 
evidence” means “a high quantum of evidence which, at the 
minimum, must be relevant and credible evidence of a quality and 
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
 In any event, it is not Cadiz’s burden to establish that the 
mycotoxins caused his adverse health conditions or that he was exposed to 
them at work and not somewhere else.  Rather, it is the employer’s burden to  
prove through substantial evidence that the mycotoxins did not cause his 
illnesses, even at the level of “slight aggravation” of existing conditions 
such as asthma.  Korsa k, 94 Hawaiʻi at 305, 12 P.3d at 1246 (“Under our 
workers’ compensation statute, the slightest aggravation or acceleration of 
an injury by the employment activity mandates compensation.” ).  Yet the 
employer’s IME reports never addressed the scientifically verifie d levels of 
harmful mycotoxins in Cadiz’s body following his four years of employment in 
what the Board itself found to be a moldy work environment.  *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
33 quantity sufficient to justify a conclusion by a reasonable 
[person] that an injury or death is not work connected.”  
Panoke, 136 
Hawaiʻi at 462, 363 P.3d at  310; Van Ness, 131 
Hawaiʻi at 558, 319 P.3d at 477.   
In Cadiz I, the Board credited the IME reports by Drs. 
Cupo and Arora as providing substantial evidence to rebut the 
presumption in favor of compensability.  However, Dr. Cupo’s 
litany of conclusory assertions th at none of Cadiz’s illnesses 
or symptoms were “caused, aggravated, or accelerated by job 
activities as a meat cutter for Times Supermarket,” tracks the 
language of the test proposed for occupational disease by this 
court in Flor, 94 Hawaiʻi at 82, 9
 P.3d at 394 (requiring, inter 
alia, that the injury- by-disease be “caused by conditions that 
are characteristic of or peculiar to the particular trade, 
occupation, or employment” ( emphasis added) ).  The conclusion 
repeated in each of Dr. Cupo’s “diagnoses” is inconsistent with 
this court’s decision in Van Ness , published little more than a 
month prior to the LIRAB’s decision in Cadiz I.  Van Ness held 
that Flor’s test is relevant for injury -by-disease claims going 
to the nature of the occupation or employment.  Van Ness, 131 
Hawaiʻi at 559, 319 P.3d at 478.  However, Flor ’s test is not 
relevant for those injury- by-disease claims that go to the 
conditions or incidents of employment rather than to the very 
nature of the job.  For such situations, the traditional unitary *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
34 or nexus test is used.  That test requires only “a causal 
connection between the injury and any incidents or conditions of 
employment.”  Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi 
at 560, 319 P.3d at 479.  It 
does not require any assessment of the relation of an injury to 
the nature of the claimant’s “job activities.”   Stated 
otherwise, Dr. Cupo’s conclusi ons in his IME report are based on 
an inapplicable legal conclusion.   
In addition, Dr. Cupo’s conclusions cannot constitute 
“substantial evidence” sufficient to rebut t he statutory 
presumption in favor of compensability.  His sixteen formulaic 
conclusions, which he labels “diagnoses ,” cannot “ justify a 
conclusion by a reasonable person that an injury . . . is not 
work-connected.”  Id. at 558, 319 P.3d at 477.  Strictly 
speaking, Dr. Cupo’s conclusions about the relation of Cadiz’s 
symptoms to the nature of his job
 as a meatcutter are, under Van 
Ness, beside the point.  Such conclusions are, in other words,  
not legally relevant in the present case and therefore cannot 
constitute substantial evidence rebutting the presumption in 
favor of compensability.  Id.   Unless Dr. Cupo’s diagnoses 
constituted substantial evidence able to reasonably rule out the 
mycotoxins discovered in Cadiz’s body as causes of some or all  
of his symptoms or injuries, his diagnoses do not add up to 
substantial evidence.  Nor does postulating an allergy to dust *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
35 as an alternative explanation for Cadiz’s many symptoms pass 
muster under the relevant legal standards.
 
In addition, the IME reports of both Dr. Cupo and Dr. 
Arora share a similar fatal flaw.  They represent attempts to 
assert that Cadiz’s symptoms of illness  are, in Dr. Cupo’s 
words, “medically plausibly explainable by other medical 
conditions” without needing to resort to toxic mold exposure.  
This line of analysis by the employer’s IME s, tacitly approved 
by the ICA, misconstrues the relevant legal standard.  “Hawaii’s 
workers’ compensation presumption places a heavy burden on the 
employer to disprove
 that an injury is work-related. ”  Korsak, 
94 Hawaiʻ i at 307, 12 P.3d at 1248
 (emphasis added).  A plausible 
alternative medical explanation, without more, does not disprove 
that an injury is work-related.   
A heart-attack may be “medically plausibly 
explainable” by an excess of cholesterol from eating too  many 
french fries, but that does not mean that a claimant’s heart 
attack was not to some extent either caused or aggravated by 
work-related stress.  See Akamine, 53 Haw. at  412, 495 P.2d at  
1168 (noting that the employer offered plausible alternative 
non-work-related explanations for a heart attack but rejecting 
that standard and holding instead that the employee ’s death at 
work from a heart attack was compensable under Hawai ‘i worker
s’ 
compensation law: “The primary focus of the medical testimony *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
36 (. . . continued) should have been a discussion on whether the employment effort, 
whether great or little, in any way aggravated Mr. Akamine’ s 
heart condition which resulted in his death.” )  See also Chung 
v. Animal Clinic, Inc. , 63 Haw. 642, 651- 52, 636 P.2d 721, 727 
(1981) (finding  that despite employer having offered a plausible 
alternative medical explanation for claimant’s heart attack, 
including arteriosclerosis and jogging , the “heart attack was 
work-connected” and theref ore compensable) . 
A recurring cough could be explained by a lingering 
version of the common cold, but it could also be explained by 
asbestosis.  Asserting that the cough is “medically plausibly 
explainable” by the common cold does not disprove asbestosis.  
Similarly, a round hole through a person’s skull might be 
“medically plausibly explainable” by the passage of a bullet, 
but that is not substantial evidence that Phineas Gage’s on -the-
job injury was not caused by a tamping iron accidentally 
transiting through his skull.10   
                     
10 Gage’s famous workplace injury predated the widespread enactment 
of workers’ compensation statutes, but i t illustrates the difficulties with 
the “medically plausibly explainable by other conditions ” standard deployed 
by Dr. Cupo.  
 
In 1848, Gage, 25, was the foreman of a crew cutting 
a railroad bed in Cavendish, Vermont.  On September 13, as 
he was using a tamping iron to pack explosive powder into a 
hole, the powder detonated.   The tamping iron  — 43 inches 
long, 1.25 inches in diameter and weighing 13.25 pounds  — 
shot skyward, penetrated Gage’s left cheek, ripped into his 
brain and exited through his skull, landing several dozen 
feet away.  . . . In time, Gage became the most famous  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
37 “Medically plaus ibly explainable by other medical 
conditions” is neither the relevant medical nor legal standard 
in the context of workers’ compensation, and the ICA erred by 
considering testimony resting on that standard to constitute 
substantial evidence rebutting the statutory presumption that an 
injury-by- disease “is causally rel ated to the employment 
activity” or conditions.  Chung, 63 Haw. at 650, 636 P.2d at 
726.  The fact that there may exist alternative medical 
explanations for the symptoms experienced by a claimant claiming 
injury-by- disease does not on its own amount to evidence 
substantial enough to rebut the presumption under the unitary or 
nexus approach of “a causal connection between the injury and 
any incidents or conditions of employment.”  Id. at 648, 636 
P.2d at 725. 
  In order to overcome the presumption in favor of 
compensability, the employer must prove through substantial 
evidence that the injury or disease was not work- connected.  
Panoke, 136 Hawaiʻ i at 461, 363 P.3d at  309; Korsak, 94 Hawaiʻi 
at 307, 12 P.3d at 1248.  In evaluating whether the burden of 
_____________________ 
(continued. . . ) 
 
patient in the annals of neuroscience, because his case was  
the first to suggest a link between brain trauma and 
personality change.   
 
Steve Twomey, Finding Phineas: An Accident with a Tamping Iron Made Phineas 
Gage One of the Most Famous Names in Neuroscience, Smithsonian, Jan. 2010, at 
9-10.  
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
38 producing substantial evidence has been met, “the slightest 
aggravation or acceleration of an injury by the employment 
activity mandates compensation.”  Panoke, 136 Haw aiʻi at 461, 363 
P.3d at 309 ; Van Ness,  131 Hawai‘i at 562, 319 P.3d at 481 
(citation omitted).  Suggesting plausible alternative 
explanations that do not rule out work- connection or even slight 
aggravation of pre- existing conditions fails to rise to the 
level of showing required to overcome the presumption in favor 
of compensability.  Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi at 558, 319 P.3d at 
477. 
Dr. Likewise’s evocation of Cadiz’s “preoccupation 
with multiple, medically unexplained somatic complaints,” might—
in some other legal context —shift the argument in favor of the 
employer, which hired Dr. Likewise.  HRS § 386-79 (requiring the 
injured employee “to submit to examination . . . by a duly 
qualified physician . . . designated and paid by the 
employer.”).   
But in the context of workers’ compensation  law, a 
lack of explanation for experienced symptoms or illnesses 
strengthens the presumption in favor of compensab ility instead 
of overcoming it.  Van Ness, 131 Hawai ʻi at 564, 319 P.3d at 483 
(stating that “doubt as to the cause of the injury represents a 
salient index of the 
absence of substantial evidence required to 
overcome the presumption that the claim is compensable. ” *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
39 (quotation marks omitted)); Lawhead, 59 Haw. at 560, 584 P.2d at 
125 (noting, in the workers’ compensation context, “a strong 
legislative policy favoring awards in arguable cases. ” (citation 
omitted)).   Dr. Likewise’s diagnosis simply does not address the 
laboratory evidence of elevated levels of harmful mycotoxins in 
Cadiz’s body.  It was clearly erroneous for the LIRAB to 
conclude that Dr. Likewise’s IME report represented a level of 
substantial evidence sufficient to rebut the presumption that 
Cadiz’s claimed injury -by-disease was work connected.  Van Ness , 
131 Hawaiʻ i at 558, 319 P.3d at 477
; Korsak , 94 Hawaiʻi at 307, 
12 P.3d at 1248 (“ Hawaii’s workers ’ compensation presumption 
places a heavy burden on the employer to disprove  that an injury 
is work-related.”  (emphasis added )).     
IV. CONCLUSION 
For the reasons state d above, we vacate the ICA’s 
judgment on appeal which affirmed the LIRAB’s decision and order  
in Cadiz I.  Given our conclusion that the employer failed to 
provide sufficient substantial evidence in Cadiz I  to meet its 
burden to produce evidence that, if believed, could overcome the 
presumption in favor of compensability, it is unnecessary for us 
to address the issues raised by the Board’s decision and order  
in Cadiz II.  We remand to the LIRAB with the instruction that 
Cadiz’s injury-by-disease is compensable under Hawaiʻi’s workers’ *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER ***  
40 compensation law and for further 
proceedings consistent with 
this opinion. 
Stanford H. Masui
Erin B.J.H. Masui
for Petitioner    /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
   
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  /s/ Richard W. Pollack  
     
 
   
Shawn L.M. Benton
Scott G. Leong 
Christine J. Kim 
for Respondents  
  
  
    /s/  Michael D. Wilson  
    
      
  
 
 
 
