***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI, Respondent/Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
KEITH T. MATSUMOTO, Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant. 
 
 
SCWC-14-0000933 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14 -0000933; CR. NO. 12- 1-0918) 
 
OCTOBER 29, 2019 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK, AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J. 
 
  T he defendant in this case confessed to a crime after 
an interrogating officer informed him, untruthfully, that he did 
not pass a polygraph test.  Our case law has established that 
deliberate falsehoods 
extrinsic  to the facts of the alleged 
offense, which are of a type reasonably likely to procure an Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0000933
29-OCT-2019
09:22 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 
 untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a confession 
regardless of guilt, will be regarded as coercive per se.   
  T he trial court in this case determined that 
defendant’s confession was voluntarily made  and admitted it  into 
evidence over defense objection.  The court also ruled that the 
defendant during his trial testimony, when discussing the 
circumstances of his confession,  could not mention the word 
“polygraph,” the word  “test,” or that the interrogating officer 
gave him inaccurate test results before his confession was 
elicited.   
In this appeal, we consider whether a deliberate 
falsehood regarding polygraph results impermissibly taints a 
confession.  We also address 
whether the court -imposed 
limitations on defendant’s testimony violated his constitutional 
rights to present a defense and to confront witnesses.  Lastly, 
we determine the propriety of the  court’s instruction to the 
jury that defined an element of the charged offense.   
  Based upon our review, we conclude that the circuit 
court erred in its rulings on these three issues and accordingly 
vacate the defendant’s conviction and remand the case for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3 
 I. BACKGROUND AND CIRCUIT COURT PROCEEDINGS 
   Keith T. Matsumoto was arrested at a wrestling 
tournament at Farrington High School (Farrington HS) on the 
island of O ahu on June 9, 2012, based upon allegations that he 
committed a sexual offense during the tournament.  Matsumoto was 
subsequently indicted in the Circuit Co
urt of the First Circuit 
(circuit court) for sexual assault in the third degree in 
violation of Hawai i Revised Statutes (HRS) §
 707-732(1)(c).1   
A. Motion to Suppress 
  Matsumoto moved to suppress statements that he made 
during and after a polygraph examination conducted while he was 
in police custody on June 10, 2012, as well as  any other item of 
evidence recovered by the Honolulu Police Department (HPD ) after 
that date.   
                     
 1 HRS § 707-732 (2009) provides as follows:  
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the 
third degree if:  
. . .  
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact 
with a person who is at least fourteen years old but 
less than sixteen years old or causes the minor to 
have sexual contact with the person; provided that:  
(i) The person is not less than five years 
older than the minor; and  
(ii) The person is not legally married to the 
minor. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 
   A hearing on the motion was held at which Matsumoto, 
Detective (Det.) Allan Kuaana, and Det. Kim McCumsey testified 
about the events surrounding a series of custodial 
interrogations that took place following Matsumoto’s arrest .2   
  Matsumoto testified that he was the State Coordinator 
for Wrestling for the 
Hawai‘i High School Athletic Association, 
that his daughter was a wrestler, and that he had gone to 
Farrington HS with his daughter on June 9, 2012, to volunteer 
for a wrestling tournament.  Matsumoto stated that  at about 
12:30 p.m. he was asked to step outside, where police officers 
placed him under arrest.  He was taken to the HPD main station, 
he testified, where
 he was booked and held in custody.  At 
approximately 8:30 p.m. that evening,  Det. McCumsey removed  him 
from his cell and took him to an interview room.  Matsumoto 
stated that Det. McCumsey, after going over a waiver of rights 
form with him, proceeded to interview him about the events of 
that morning, told 
him he would have to take a polygraph test,3 
and then returned him to his cell.   
                     
2  The Honorable Randal  K.O. Lee presided over all circuit court 
proceedings referenced in this opinion.  
 3 During her testimony, Det. McCumsey testified that Matsumoto had 
agreed to take a polygraph test on his own volition when she asked if he was 
willing to submit to the test.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5 
   The next morning  Det. McCumsey escorted Matsumoto to a 
polygraph room, he testified, where she introduced him to Det. 
Kuaana before leaving the room
.4  Det. Kuaana gave Matsumoto a 
polygraph waiver form, Matsumoto stated, that indicated 
Matsumoto would be provided with the results of the polygraph 
immediately following the conclusion of the examination.  Det. 
Kuaana then put electrodes on Matsumoto and hooked him up to the 
polygraph machine, he testified .  Det. Kuaana asked a series of 
questions, unrelated to the events resulting in Matsumoto’s 
arrest, to calibrate the polygraph .  Among other things, Det . 
Kuaana asked Matsumoto about his divorce and told Matsumoto to 
say he was holding a $5 bill when he was holding a $20 bill.  
Det. Kuaana then showed Matsumoto the results, Matsumoto stated, 
pointing out where the machine indicated Matsumoto was 
untruthful.   
  Matsumoto testified that 
Det. Kuaana then interviewed 
him regarding the events of the previous day.  Matsumoto stated 
                     
 4 Matsumoto testified that while being held at the HPD main 
station, he was placed in a concrete cell without an adequate blanket to 
shield against the cold temperature, which aggravated an existing spinal 
injury for which he had previously had surgery.  He further stated that he 
had eaten very little, had not slept much, and had become dehydrated because 
it was difficult to drink from the fountain in his cell, which caused his 
contact lenses to dry out and scratch his cornea.  Matsumoto testified that  
he informed Det. Kuaana of his physical state prior to taking the polygraph 
examination.  Detectives McCumsey and Kuaana testified that Matsumoto 
appeared well- rested and did not seem to be in any extreme pain or 
discomfort.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 
 that, upon completion of the test, Det. Kuaana removed the 
electrodes and told Matsumoto that he did not pass the polygraph 
test.  Det.  Kuaana never used the term “inconclusive,” Matsumoto 
testified, and he did not show Matsumoto the test results.   
  According to Matsumoto, Det. Kuaana continued to 
interrogate him and refused to accept his answers, stating that 
“there had to have been more on the basis that [Matsumoto] had 
failed the polygraph [test].”  Matsumoto testified that Det.  
Kuaana told him that he needed to make another statement,  and 
then told Det. McCumsey upon her return that Matsumoto wished  to 
speak with her.   
  Following the conclusion of Matsumoto’s testimony, 
Det. McCumsey  testified.  Det. McCumsey stated that  she 
initially asked Matsumoto if he would be willing to take a 
polygraph test because she offer s every suspect who denies 
committing a crime the opportunity to take an examination.  She 
testified that she believed Det.  Kuaana told her that the 
results of Matsumoto’s polygraph test were  inconclusive when she 
returned to the polygraph room after the test  had concluded.   
Det. McCumsey stated that, following the polygraph examination , 
she brought Matsumoto to an  interview room, obtained a waiver of 
his Miranda rights, and interrogated him  a second time.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 
   Det.  Kuaana testified  that there are three phases to a 
polygraph examination:  the pre-test, the in-test, and the  post-
test--the last of which includes further interrogation “if 
someone doesn’t pass an exam or fails an exam.”   Before giving 
Matsumoto constitutional warnings, Det.  Kuaana stated, he 
explained the three phases to Matsumoto and said that he would 
give him the results of the exam ination during the post- test 
phase.  He did not tell Matsumoto that the post- test phase could 
include further interrogation.   
  Det . Kuaana testified that during the pre -test phase 
he discussed with Matsumoto the difference between truth and 
lies, the test questions, and the allegations against him.  The 
detective stat ed that,  during this phase, he interacted with 
Matsumoto as though he believed Matsumoto was innocent and that 
it was his job to assist him  in getting through the process.  
Det. Kuaana  testified that  he also explained to Matsumoto during 
the pre-test phase how a p olygraph works, informing him that it 
“is a pass/fail test, either you pass or you don’t.”    
  After conducting a practice test,  Det. Kuaana 
testified, he moved on to the in- test phase.  He testified that 
he asked Matsumoto a series of questions regarding the 
allegations against him and determined that the results of the 
polygraph test were “inconclusive ,” meaning that Matsumoto’s ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 
 (continued . . .)  “score” was “right in the middle” and did not fall within the 
range needed to pass or to fail the examination .  Det. Kuaana 
testified that he nonetheless told Matsumoto that he  “did not 
pass the test.”  He did not tell Matsumoto that the test was 
inconclusive, but he testified that he believed his statement 
was accurate because “for the sake of the polygraph, an 
inconclusive result is not passing.”    
  Det.  Kuaana stated that he then moved to the post- test 
phase, in which he began to ask accusatory questions and told 
Matsumoto that he knew 
Matsumoto was not telling him the truth.  
He explained that he intentionally shifted his attitude during 
this post-test phase as “an interrogation tactic”:  
When I go into the post -test phase, obviously I have 
results from my polygraph; he didn’t pass.   I know there’s  
some other things about the case, so then it becomes more 
accusatory.  I become more confident in my accusations.  
It’s no longer about whether or not you’ve done it; we know 
you did it.  It’s just a question of why did you do it.   
Det. Kuaana testified that t hroughout the polygraph  test, 
Matsumoto appeared to be in “disbelief” and was calm in a way 
that indicated that Matsumoto could not believe he was in the 
position that he was in.  The State rested following the 
conclusion of Det. Kuaana’s testimony.5   
                     
 5 Det. Kuaana’s Polygraph E xamination Report was accepted into 
evidence at the hearing.  In the post -test section of the report, Det. Kuaana 
wrote that he “explained the importance to tell the truth so that whenever a 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 
   Matsumoto argued that because the results of a 
polygraph test are inadmissible at trial under Hawaiʻ i caselaw,  
he would be unable to explain the basis and context of the 
statements he made during the in-test and post- test phases of 
the polygraph examination, and accordingly these statements 
should be inadmissible.  Matsumoto also argued that his 
statements during the post
-test phase should be suppressed 
because they were the result of Det. Kuaana intentionally 
leading him to falsely believe that he had failed the polygraph 
examination, which is an issue extrinsic to the facts of the 
case, and his statements were  thus per se coerced and 
inadmissible under Hawai‘i law.6   
  In response, the State argued that, although results 
of a polygraph test are inadmissible, the omission of the 
circumstances surrounding Matsumoto’s statements should not 
render the statements inadmissible 
because they were supported 
by valid waivers of Matsumoto’s  constitutional rights.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
‘reasonable person’ were to review the facts of the case, that pe rson would 
be able to understand the subject account of the incident.”   
 6  Matsumoto also contended that Det. Kuaana’s cautionary advisory 
to him of what a “reasonable person” would be able to understand from the 
facts of the case, in addition to other circumstances that Matsumoto asserted 
amounted to a promise of leniency, resulted in his statements not having been 
knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily given.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 
 Matsumoto’s statements, the State conte nded, were not obtained 
through coercion or trickery.  According to the State, Det.  
Kuaana did not lie when he told Matsumoto that he did not pass 
the polygraph examination  because the results were inconclusive 
and did not indicate that Matsumoto had passed.7   
  T he circuit court orally denied the motion to suppress 
at the conclusion of the hearing and later issued findings of 
fact and conclusions of law.   The court concluded that, while  
the results of the polygraph examination were inadmissible at 
trial, the post-polygraph interview was distinguishable from the 
polygraph test results, and the statements made during the post-
polygraph interview 
were therefore  admissible.  The court 
further found that Det. Kuaana’s statement that Matsumoto did 
not pass the polygraph test was not a falsehood because it was 
technically true that Matsumoto did not obtain a passing result.  
And, even assuming the statement  could be considered to be 
deceptive, the court continued, it would not be a falsehood 
extrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense that would be 
reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement.  Matsumoto 
                     
 7 The State also contended that Det. Kuaana’s advice that it would 
be better for Matsumoto to tell the truth was not deceptive or coercive and 
was calculated to enhance the trustworthiness of any subsequent statement by 
Matsumoto.  The State thus argued that Matsumoto’s waiver of his 
constitutional rights was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 
 “could have insisted that the test was wrong and that he had 
been telling the truth,” the court stated.  T he court thus ruled 
all of Matsumoto’s statements were admissible.8   
B. Prohibition Against Mentioning Polygraph at Trial 
  Prior to trial, Matsumoto filed a motion in limine 
regarding the statements he made following the polygraph 
examination.  At the hearing, Matsumoto again argued that Det . 
Kuaana’s statement to him that he did not pass the polygraph 
test was a “material misrepresentation.”  Matsumoto argued that 
the fact that he took a polygraph examination should be 
admissible, as should the fact that he was told that he did not 
pass.  Otherwise, Matsumoto argued, the jury would not know the 
context in which the statements were made, including that his 
statements were motivated by his false belief that he had failed 
the polygraph examination .   
  The circuit court ruled that there was to be no 
mention of the word “polygraph” or the word “test.”  The court 
further ruled that Det. Kuaana would only be allowed to testify  
that he made a statement to Matsumoto that was not “totally 
                     
 8 The court did not independently address Det. Kuaana’s advice to 
Matsumoto that it was important to tell the truth so that a reasonable person 
could follow his account or Matsumoto’s testimony that Det. Kuaana’s promised 
him leniency if he confessed , but it ruled that Matsumoto’s statements were 
intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily made without police coercion.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 
 true.”  The parties were also not  permitted to say to the jury 
that the statement was a material misrepresentation, the court 
held.   
C. Trial 
  Trial commenced on January 17, 2014,  and included the 
following testimony.  The complaining witness ( CW) testified 
that, on the day of the tournament at Farrington HS , Matsumoto 
touched her two times in ways that made her feel uncomfortable.9  
The first time occurred when she was getting pre- match 
paperwork.  Matsumoto bumped into her and his hand slid across 
her buttocks, she stated.  The CW testified that there were many 
people in the area and she believed at the time that it was an 
accident.   
  The second time took place while the CW was coaching 
one of her friends, she stated.  The CW testified that she 
remembered Matsumoto walking up behind her and talking to her 
“about wrestling stuff” as he massaged her shoulders and touched 
her stomach.  When the CW tried to leave, she testified, 
Matsumoto slapped and grabbed her buttocks with both hands.  The 
CW said that, after Matsumoto touched her this second time, she 
went straight to her father to tell him what happened because 
                     
9 The CW described these incidents as a touch, a slap, a slide, or 
a grab of her buttocks.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13 
 she felt uncomfortable.  The CW testified that the touch was not 
to congratulate her for anything.   
  William Ullom , who was a volunteer wrestling coach at 
Radford High School and was familiar with the complainant 
through his experience in the wrestling community, testified for 
the State.10  Ullom stated that he saw Matsumoto “inappropriately 
touch[]” the CW by grabbing her buttocks and moving his hands to 
her groin and down the sides of her back.  The CW reacted by 
getting up immediately,  acting distraught, and leaving, Ullo m 
testified.  According to Ullom, as part of his mandatory 
reporting obligations as a coach,  he insisted the police be 
called.   
  Det. Kuaana testified that his post- polygraph 
interrogation of Matsumoto lasted three and a half hours.11  
During the first part of his interrogation, Det. Kuaana 
testified that he attempted to develop a rapport with Matsumoto 
to get him to relax and communicate, and that he then asked 
                     
10 Ullom was also familiar with Matsumoto from two interactions at 
previous wrestling tournaments.  In the first incident, a student wrestler 
did not have a doctor’s note allowing him to participate in a match; Ullom 
attempted to have a tournament doctor clear the student to participate, but 
Matsumoto opposed this effort as it was against the tournament rules.  In the 
second incident, one of Ullom’s students was initially prevented from 
participating for failure to weigh in but was eventually allowed to compete.   
 11 The interrogation was not recorded, but Det. Kuaana testified 
that he took notes of what was said.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 
 Matsumoto for the facts of the case as Matsumoto understood them 
to be.  Matsumoto stated that he did not touch the CW’s butt in 
any way.   
  Det. Kuaana testified that he then switched to a 
“direct confrontation technique” in which he “exud[ed] 
confidence” in the fact that the person he was interrogating 
committed an offense.  Det. Kuaana acknowledged that during the 
interrogation he provided some information to Matsumoto that was 
“not completely accurate” but explained that interrogators are 
permitted to use deception within  guidelines set by case 
precedent.  Det. Kuaana indicated that his goal was to get 
Matsumoto to admit that he had grabbed the CW’s butt ocks, if 
Matsumoto had done so.  Det. Kuaana testified tha t, although he 
knew there were inconsistencies in the police reports, he told 
Matsumoto that he had solid evidence and that based on what he 
had seen and what he knew, there was no doubt that the 
allegations against him  were true.12   
  Det. Kuaana then 
showed Matsumoto a diagram of the 
gym, and he pointed out where Matsumoto was when the touching 
                     
12 Det. Kuaana also used an “alternative question” technique in 
which he said to Matsumoto: “Okay, look you know, there’s no doubt that you 
touched her, but what I want to know is did you  touch her just one time or 
more than once?”  According to Det. Kuaana, that question had “three possible 
answers: more than once, just once, or never.”  Det. Kuaana testified that 
Matsumoto answered that he had only touched the CW once and was dejected 
after saying so.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15 
 occurred.  Matsumoto said that the CW was crouched down and he 
had patted and grabbed her buttocks .   
  Det.  McCumsey testified that she observed  and listened 
to Det. Kuaana’s post-polygraph interrogation of Matsumoto 
through a viewing window.  According to Det. McCumsey, by the 
end of Det. Kuaana’s  interrogation , Matsumoto admitted to 
“grabbing” the CW’s buttock s while she was bent over by the 
wrestling mat watching one of her friends.  Det. McCumsey stated  
that, following Det. Kuaana’s interrogation  and with Matsumoto 
present, Det. Kuaana told her what Matsumoto said in the 
interrogation as if she had not heard it before.  Det. McCumsey 
testified that Matsumoto agreed to submit to a second 
interrogation by her.13   
  During Det. McCumsey’s testimony  concerning her 
interrogations of Matsumoto, two video recordings of those 
interrogations were played for the jury.14  In the second 
                     
 13 The substance of these recordings was consistent with Det. 
McCumsey’s testimony at trial.   
 14 These videos had been edited to remove matters the court had 
ruled were inadmissible.  Before the recording of the first interrogation was 
played, Matsumoto objected to giving the jury redacted transcripts of these 
videos.  The deleted text was replaced by  large black lines varying in size 
from several lines, with some lines covering nearly a full page.  Matsumoto 
argued that the large number of redactions were prejudicial because the jury 
would speculate as to the substance of the redacted words, and he requested 
that the jurors just watch the videos and not be provided with the 
transcripts.  The court overruled Matsumoto’s objection, allowed the jury to 
use the redacted transcripts, and instructed the jurors not to speculate 
regarding the redacted content.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 
 interrogation, Det. McCumsey testified, Matsumoto made 
statements about not remembering how any touching could have 
happened but said that he must have touched the CW.  Det. 
McCumsey stated that when she  tried to “lock [Matsumoto] in” to 
get him to “commit to something[,]”  regarding touching the CW, 
Matsumoto responded
, “I’m not gonna say I didn’t.  But if 
anything, I would characterize it as a ‘good job’ slap
.”  After 
Matsumoto later said that it might have been a “‘good job’ pat 
on the butt,” Det.
 McCumsey stated, she asked if the reason that 
Matsumoto touched the CW that way was because it was a moment of 
“bad judgment
,” and Matsumoto said it was “weakness .”  Det. 
McCumsey testified that Matsumoto also agreed that he grabbed 
the CW’s buttocks “because the opportunity was there.”  In the 
interrogation, according to Det. McCumsey, Matsumoto 
demonstrated a slapping- type motion, not a grabbing motion.    
  Following the State’s last witness, Matsumoto made a 
motion for a judgment of acquittal.  The court denied  the motion  
and Matsumoto proceeded with his case.   
  Darren Reyes, head coach for the Farrington HS 
wrestling team, was the site director and host for the 
tournament where the alleged incident took place.  During the 
tournament, Reyes coached the CW on a wrestling move.  He 
testified that the CW never told him that she had been ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 
 inappropriately touched by Matsumoto and that she appeared  
“jolly” and “cheerful”  subsequent to the match when the alleged 
touching occurred.   
  Corey Taniguchi, a volunteer coach at the wrestling 
tournament, testified that he was standing near the CW during 
the second alleged touching.  He testified that he saw nothing 
unusual during the match.  R.G., a student from Waipahu High 
School, refereed the match whe n the second alleged incident 
occurred.  He testified that he did not see Matsumoto touch the 
CW at any time.   
  Matsumoto testified on his own behalf.  He indicated 
that he was the technical director for the Hawai ‘i Technology 
Development Venture, a federal program that develops the 
technology industry in Hawai ʻi.  Matsumoto
 stated that he 
wrestled in high school and in college and had been coaching 
since 1979.15  At the time of the tournament, Matsumoto sa id that 
he was a certified USA wrestling coach and was involved in 
                     
15 Matsumoto also testified to previous incidents with Ullom, which 
Matsumoto portrayed as negative.  Matsumoto stated that he blocked Ullom’s 
student from participating in a tournament for failing to have a doctor’s 
note.  According to Matsumoto, Ullom reacted poorly to this decision.  
Additionally, Matsumoto testified that, at a separate tournament, he was 
required to block a student from wrestling for failing to weigh in.  He was 
forced to ask Ullom to leave the coach’s table, Matsumoto related, due to  
Ullom’s disruptive reaction to his decision.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 
 running wrestling tournaments and managing the state wrestling 
weight monitoring program.   
  Matsumoto testified that he arrived at the tournament 
around 10:30 a.m.  He explained that one of his two daughters 
was a wrestler at the tournament.   According to Matsumoto, the 
first time he saw the CW was at the scoring table; she was 
standing next to one of Matsumoto’s daughters and other female 
wrestlers.  Matsumoto stated that he just said “hi” to the CW 
but did not want to bother her because she was “running the 
clock” for a match.   
  Matsumoto testified that, during the first alleged 
touching, he was focused on coaching, did not interact with the 
CW, and did not have any physical contact with the CW.  
Regarding the second alleged incident, Matsumoto admitted making 
contact with CW’s buttock s but stated that it was a “good job 
pat on the butt and not a grab as alleged.”   
  According to Matsumoto, Det. Kuaana suggested that, if 
he gave the police something, apologized, and quit coaching, the 
case might not proceed.16  Based upon Det.  Kuaana telling him  
about the strength of the case and providing him with 
                     
16 Matsumoto also testified that Det. Kuaana told him that if he did 
not tell the police what he did, he would spend another night in the cell 
block, but that if he admitted something, they could try “to work something 
out.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19 
 “misleading or inaccurate information,” Matsumoto testified, he 
began to doubt his memory.  Matsumoto stated that he never told 
Det. Kuaana that he grabbed the CW’s butt ocks, but acknowledged 
that it was possible that he may have touched the CW.  Matsumoto 
testified that he found out later that Det.  Kuaana gave him 
information that was not completely accurate and that there was 
“no doubt” that the information was not completely accurate .   
  During the third interrogation, Matsumoto testified, 
he told Det. McCumsey that he could not recall touching the CW’s 
butt but gave various examples of how it could have occurred.   
1. Jury Instructions and Verdict 
  During the settlement of the jury instructions , the 
circuit court considered its proposed supplemental jury 
instruction 2 to define “sexual contact”17: 
 “Sexual contact” means any touching, other
 than acts 
of “sexual penetration,” of the sexual or other intimate  
parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the 
sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, 
whether directly  or through the clothing or other material  
intended to cover the sexual or other intimate parts. 
 
 “Sexual parts” means the sex organs. 
 
 “Intimate  parts” means the buttocks and those parts 
of the body typically associated  with sexual relations.  
 
 In considering whether the part of the body touched 
is a “sexual or other intimate part,” you must consider  the 
context in which the touching occurred . 
                     
 17 Sexual assault in the third degree, HRS §  707-732(1)(c), requires 
proof of sexual contact.  See supra note 1.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 
 (Emphases added.) 
  Matsumoto argued that case law had limited 
consideration of “ context” to the circumstances underlying 
the incident at issue and that context must exclude 
subsequent conduct in a different setting.   Accordingly, he 
proposed his own instruction as to the applicable law.18  
Matsumoto contended that it was “critical for the jury to 
understand that not any  touching of the buttocks is 
automatically sexual contact” as the instruction indicated.   
  T he court during the conference with counsel 
provided the parties with a modified supplemental jury 
instruction 2, which proposed substituting a single word.19  
Matsumoto also objected to this instruction, maintaining 
that he still requested his proposed instruction 3 because 
it more accurately reflected the statement in State v. 
                     
 18 Matsumoto’s p roposed instruction 3 reads as follows:  
In determining whether an alleged touching of [the CW’s] “sexual or 
other intimate parts” occurred, you must consider the context in which 
the alleged touching occurred.  A body part which might be a “sexual or 
other intimate part” in one context might not be in another context.  
“Sexual parts” refers to the sex organs.  “Intimate parts” refers to 
those parts of the body typically associated with sexual relations.  
The “context” refers only to the particular situation  in which the 
alleged touching occurred.  In evaluating the “context” in which the 
alleged touching occurred, you must only consider the circumstances of 
the particular incident, not the circumstances that occurred in prior 
or subsequent incidents.   
19 The court modified supplemental instruction 2 to replace the word 
“touching” in the last paragraph with “contact.”   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 
 Silver, 125 Hawai i 1, 249 P.3d 1141 (2011),  that “a body 
part which might be a sexual or other intimate part in one 
context might not be in another. ”  The court refused 
Matsumoto’s proposed instruction 3  and submitted , over 
defense objection, its supplemental jury instructions 2  to 
the jury.   
  The jury found Matsumoto guilty as charged.  Matsumoto 
was sentenced to five years of probation, which included a jail 
term of six months as a condition .  Matsumoto appealed from the 
judgment of conviction and probation sentence to the 
Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA).
   
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  T he ICA in its summary disposition order (SDO),20 first 
addressed the volun tariness of Matsumoto’s statements .  The ICA 
held that Det. Kuaana’s statement that Matsumoto did not pass 
the polygraph test was not a deliberate falsehood because 
“strictly speaking” Matsumoto “did not score well enough to 
‘pass’ nor did he score well enough to fail.”  The ICA also 
concluded that the challenged statements of Det. Kuaana 
regarding the polygraph test results were  intrinsic to the 
                     
 20 The ICA’s SDO can be found at State v. Matsumoto, No. CAAP -14-
0000933, 2017 WL 3720456 (Aug. 29, 2017).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 
 charge because they related to the strength of the evidence 
against Matsumoto and thus were not coercive per se. 
  Next, the ICA analyzed  the totality of the 
circumstances surrounding Matsumoto’s post -polygraph statements 
and held that Matsumoto’s post -polygraph statements were 
voluntary.  The ICA determined  that it was “far from clear that 
hearing he did not pass the polygraph exam caused Matsumoto to 
make his post-polygraph statements.”   In addition , the ICA 
pointed to the detectives’ de scriptions of Matsumoto as not 
appearing physically impaired and Matsumoto’s level of education 
as supporting the determination of Matsumoto’s post -polygraph 
statement as voluntary.21   
  The ICA then addressed the circuit court’s exclusion 
of evidence that Matsumoto’s post -polygraph statements were 
induced by Det. Kuaana’s representation that Matsumoto did not 
pass the polygraph test.  The ICA concluded that “Hawai ʻi case 
law does not provide for an exception to the prohibition against 
polygraph results, ” and Det. Kuaana’s assessment of the 
polygraph results and his statements to Matsumoto were therefore 
properly excluded.
   
                     
21 The ICA did not address Matsumo to’s argument that his confession 
was induced by Det. Kuaana’s implied promise of leniency.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 
   As to the court’s instruction on “intimate parts, ” the 
ICA concluded that the jury instructions adequately conveyed the 
need to consider the context in which a body part was touched as 
required by State v. Silver.  Matsumoto’s argument, the ICA 
stated, “hinges on the supposition that the jury followed the 
[“intimate parts” of the instruction] but ignored the [“context 
part of the instruction”] and fails to provide any evidence in 
support of this assumption.”  Without such evidence, the ICA 
held that Matsumoto could not overcome the presumption that a 
jury generally follows court instructions and did so in this 
case.   
  Lastly, as to the sufficiency of the evidence, t he ICA 
noted that both the CW and Ullom “testified that the touching 
was more than a swat on the buttocks but consisted of squeezing 
and moving his hands to the front of [the CW’s] body.”   Viewing 
the testimony of the CW and Ullom in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, the ICA held that there was substantial evidence 
such that a reasonable juror could have found Matsumoto guilty.22   
  The ICA thus affirmed the circuit court’s judgment of 
conviction and probation sentence.  
Matsumoto  timely filed an 
application for writ of certiorari, which this court  accepted.    
                     
22 The ICA also rejected Matsumoto’s argument regarding the 
prejudicial presentation of the redacted transcripts.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 
 III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Conclusions of Law  
  Conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, under the 
right/wrong standard of review.  Maria v. Freitas , 73 Haw. 266, 
270, 832 P.2d 259, 262 (1992). 
B. Voluntariness of a Statement 
  The admissibility of a confession or an inculpatory 
statement, that is “whether the confession or inculpatory 
statement was voluntarily given, ” is a “purely legal question” 
decided by the trial court by “assess[ing] the manner in which a 
confession or inculpatory statement [was] extracted.”  State v. 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 518, 849 P.2d 58, 76 (1993). 
C. Jury Instructions 
  
The propriety of jury instructions is a question of 
law reviewed de novo using the following standard: whether, 
“when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient , erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading.”  State v. Bovee, 139 Hawa ii 530, 537, 394 P.3d 760, 
767 (2017) (quoting State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawaii 76, 79, 156 
P.3d 1182, 1185 (2007)).  
D. Sufficiency of Evidence 
  A jury verdict must be upheld if there is substantial 
evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 
 “‘Substantial evidence ’ as to every material element of the 
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a [person] of reasonable 
caution” to reach a conclusion.   State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 
248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992).  Such evidence is viewed in 
the light most favorable to the prosecution.  Id. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Voluntariness of Statements 
  “The constitutional right against self -incrimination 
prevents the prosecution’s use of a defendant’s extrajudicial 
admissions of guilt where such admissions are the product of 
coercion.”  State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 502, 849 P.2d 58, 
69 (1993) (citing State v. Wakinekona, 53 Haw. 574, 576, 499 
P.2d 678, 680 (1972)).  The reasons for barring coerced 
admissions include “the inherent unt rustworthiness of 
involuntary confessions, a desire that criminal proceedings be 
accusatorial rather than inquisitorial[,] and a desire that the 
police not become law breakers in the process of achieving 
society’s valid law enforcement objectives.”  Id.  (citing 
Wakinekona, 53 Haw. at 576, 499 P.2d at 680).   
  A police officer’s use of subterfuge to induce a 
suspect to make an incriminating statement may rise to the level 
of coercion, rendering the statement involuntary, untrustworthy, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 
 and inadmissible.  See  id. at 508-09, 849 P.2d  72.  When 
measuring “the legitimacy of the use of ‘deception’ by the 
police in eliciting confessions or inculpatory statements from 
suspects and arrestees,” Hawai ‘i courts evaluate the use of 
falsehoods regarding information intrinsic to the case 
differently from deception that is extrinsic to the facts of the 
alleged offense.  Id. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.  When the police 
use “deliberate falsehoods extrinsic to the facts of the alleged 
offense, which are of a type reasonably likely to procure an 
untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a confession 
regardless of guilt, [they] will be regarded as coercive per 
se.”  Id. (emphasis omitted).    
  Exampl es of extrinsic  falsehoods include assurances of 
divine salvation upon confession; promises of mental health 
treatment in exchange for a confession; assurances of treatment 
in a “nice hospital” in lieu of incarceration, in exchange for a 
confession; promises of more favorable treatment in the event of 
a confession; and misrepresentations of legal principles, such 
as misrepresenting the consequences of a “habitual offender” 
conviction and holding out that the defendant’s confession 
cannot be used against the  defendant at trial.  Id. at 512–13, 
849 P.2d at 73–74.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 
   When the police use “deliberate falsehoods intrinsic 
to the facts of the alleged offense in question[, they] will be 
treated as one of the totality of circumstances surrounding the 
confession or statement to be considered in assessing its 
voluntariness.”  Id. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.  Intrinsic 
falsehoods include, for example, a statement that a murder 
victim is still alive,  a claim that  articles of clothing were 
found at a crime scene, or an assert ion that  cameras were 
recording the area of the crime.  
  Matsumoto argues that, because Det. Kuaana employed an 
extrinsic falsehood to induce him
 to make incriminating 
statements, the circuit court should have concluded that his 
post-polygraph interview
s were the result of coerc ion.   
1. Deception as to  the Polygraph Results 
a. Det. Kuaana’s statement to Matsumoto that he did not pass the 
polygraph was an objective falsehood 
  Matsumoto contends  that Det. Kuaana telling him that 
he did not pass the polygraph test  was a falsehood that should 
have led the circuit court to preclude his statements  at trial .  
The circuit court concluded, and the ICA agreed , that telling 
Matsumoto that he did not pass the polygraph test was not a 
falsehood, and even if it 
were, the falsehood was intrinsic to 
the offense and therefore his confession was admissible.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 
   Det. Kuaana told Matsumoto that a polygraph 
examination is “a pass/fail test, either you pass or you don’t.”  
This was an incorrect and misleading characterization of a 
polygraph test, Det. Kuaana admitted, as the results may be 
inconclusive.  Det. Kuaana acknowledged that there was a third 
possible outcome by explaining that Matsumoto did not score well 
enough to pass, nor “well enough to fail”; Matsumoto was “rig ht 
in the middle.”  Despite previously explaining to Matsumoto that 
he would receive the results of the polygraph test, Det. Kuaana 
never disclosed to Matsumoto that his test result s were 
inconclusive.   
  Det. Kuaana’s statement that Matsumoto did not pas s 
the polygraph test, taken in conjunction with the earlier 
misstatement that a polygraph test could only be passed or 
failed, necessarily implied that Matsumoto had failed the 
polygraph examination, which  was objectively false.  Det. Kuaana 
then reinforced this false impression by “confident [ly]” telling 
Matsumoto that he was not telling the truth, which Det. Kuaana 
described as “an interrogation tactic”  to inform Matsumoto that 
he had obtained objective proof from the polygraph test that 
Matsumoto was lying.  Matsumoto would thus have logically 
concluded that Det. Kuaana was  communicating the results that he 
was promised and which represented the entirety of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 
 information gleaned from the polygraph test.  Det. Kuaana never 
corrected this impression by fulfilling his pledge to disclose 
the actual results of the polygraph examination --that the test 
results w ere inconclusive.  
  Taken in context, Det. Kuaana’s statements to 
Matsumoto amounted to an objective falsehood.  And, in light of 
Det. Kuaana’s testimony that he was “allowed to use deception” 
within “strict guidelines” and was acting “within these 
guidelines” when he made the inaccurate statements to Matsumoto, 
they were deliberate falsehoods.  Thus, Det. Kuaana used 
deliberate deception when interrogating Matsumoto. 
b. Det. Kuaana’s deliberate falsehood was an extrinsic falsehood  
that was coercive per se 
  As stated, a  deliberate falsehood will be regarded as 
coercive per se if the falsehood is extrinsic to the facts of 
the alleged offense and is of a type reasonably likely to 
procure an untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a 
confession regardless of guilt.   Kelekolio, 74 Haw.  at 511, 849 
P.2d at 73.  A deception of this nature obviates the need for a 
“totality of circumstances” ana lysis of 
the voluntarines s of the 
statement by the court in order to determine admissibility.   Id.   
  The deliberate falsehood in this case was Det. 
Kuaana’s statement s regarding the  results of Matsumoto’s 
polygraph test.  This falsehood was not a lie by the officer ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 
 about any “facts of the alleged offense.”  It was not, for 
example, a falsehood about the existence of bystanders to the 
crime, of witnesses coming to the station to give a statement, 
or the discovery of a weapon used to commit the offense.  
Instead of being a lie about the facts of the offense, it was a 
lie about the test results  of a scientific instrument that was 
avowed to accurately determine whether the subject of the test 
was telling the truth.23  But lying about the results of a 
scientific test is unequivocally not a lie about the facts of 
the offense, and the falsehood in this case was thus extrinsic 
to the facts of the alleged offense.   
  Additionally, to be coercive per se, the deliberate 
falsehood also must be of a type that is reasonably likely to 
induce 
an untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a 
confession regardless of guilt.   In addressing this factor, we 
consider the nature of the polygraph test itself and the effects 
of its results on the examinee.  
  T he polygraph is a scientific instrument that purports 
to accurately determine whether the subject of the test is 
telling the truth.  See  United States v. Scheffer, 523 U.S. 303, 
313 (1998) (“The common form of polygraph test measures a 
                     
23 During Matsumoto’s test, the polygraph indicated that Matsumoto 
lied about having $20 in his hand, emphatically external to the fact.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 
 variety of physiological response s to a set of questions asked 
by the examiner, who then interprets these physiological 
correlates of anxiety and offers an opinion . . . about whether 
. . . the accused-- was deceptive in answering questions. ”).  An 
examinee who has not lied does not expect to be given falsified 
polygraph test results from the police.  It is thus n ot 
surprising that  the presentation of falsified results may have 
serious and substantial effects on a suspect.  “[E]xperiments 
have shown that . . . counterfeit test results . . . can 
substantially alter subjects’  . . . beliefs, perceptions of 
other people, behaviors  toward other people,  emotional states , . 
. . self- assessments, [and] memories for observed and 
experienced events .”  Saul M. Kassin et. al, Police-Induced 
Confessions: Risk Factors and Recommendations , 34 L. & Hum. 
Behav. 3, 17 (2010)  (citing studies that have tracked the 
effects of counterfeit test results, along with other deceptive 
tactics) (internal citations omitted) .   
  Falsified polygraph results may pressure a suspect 
into changing the suspect’s pre -test narrative.  This pressure 
is intensified when an officer expresses confidence that the 
suspect is lying and is aggressive in pushing the suspect to 
confess on the basis of the officer’s pre -formed belief of the ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
32 
 suspect’s guilt.24  Richard A. Leo & Richard J. Ofshe, The Truth 
About False Confessions and Advocacy Scholarship, 37 Crim. L. 
Bull. 293, 293-370 (2001).  Falsified polygraph results are 
geared towards making the s
uspect believe in one’s own guilt or 
believing that the officer will not stop the interrogation until 
the suspect confesses guilt.  See  Klara Stephens, Misconduct and 
Bad Practices in False Confessions: Interrogations in the 
Context of Exonerations, 11 Ne. U. L. Rev. 593, 596 (2019) 
(finding that false polygraph results are “bad practices” that 
produce both true and false confessions).   
  Once a suspect believes that a confession of guilt is 
inevitable, the individual is cognitively geared to accept, 
comply with, and even approve of that outcome.  Kassin et. al., 
supra, at 17, (citing Elliot Aronson, The Social Animal (1999)) 
(exploring how human beings cognitively respond once they view 
an outcome as inevitable).  That is, false polygraph results  may 
psychologically prime an innocent suspect to make a confession.  
                     
24 Det. Kuaana described the post -polygraph phase as follows:  
 
When I go into the post -test phase, obviously I have 
results from my polygraph; he didn’t pass.  I know there’s 
some other things about the case, so then it becomes more 
accusatory.  I become more confident in my accusations.  
It’s no longer about whether or not you’ve done it; we know 
you did it.  It’s just a qu estion of why did you do it.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
33 
   The case of “The Norfolk Four” is emblematic of how 
falsified polygraph results can coerce a suspect in to making  a 
confession.  See Tom Wells & Richard A. Leo, The Wrong Guys 
(2008) (detailing the backgrounds, arrests, interrogations, and 
court proceedings of the Norfolk Four).  The Norfolk Four were 
young men, each without criminal records, each enlisted in the 
Navy, and each trained to endure highly stressful situations.  
Id.  These men were subjected to intense interrogations in which 
they were repeatedly accused of lying and fed information about 
the case.  During their interrogations, the men each took a 
polygraph test and were presented with falsified polygraph test 
results.  Only then did the men confess, in graphic detail, to a 
brutal “gang” rape and murder that they did not commit.  Id.  
Shortly after their confessions, DNA evidence conclusively 
showed that none of these men was the donor of the semen sample 
recovered from the victim.  Nevertheless, their cases were still 
prosecuted: one of the men was convicted by a jury of the murder 
and rape, another was convicted of rape, and two took plea 
agreements to avoid the death penalty.25  Id.  Subsequent to 
their trials, the sole perpetrator of the crimes, who was 
                     
25 One of these men, Joseph Dick, became so convinced of his guilt 
after the false polygraph results that he would go on to testify against the 
other defendants and even wrote apology letters to the family of the victim 
professing his guilt.  Wells & Leo, supra, at 187, 244.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
34 
 already in prison for sexual assault, confessed to the crime and 
a DNA match was obtained from him.  It took over 20 years for 
the Norfolk Four to be granted clemency.  Priyanka Boghani, 
“Norfolk Four” Pardoned 20 Years after False Confessions, PBS 
(Mar. 22, 2017).26   
  Extensive scientific literature and numerous 
documented cases have demonstrated the coercive nature of 
falsified polygraph test results; they can change a suspect’s 
beliefs, pressure a suspect to confess, and even cause the 
suspect to believe they committed the crime when they did not.  
We thus conclude that providing falsified polygraph test results 
to a suspect as part of a custodial interrogation is an 
extrinsic falsehood that poses an unacceptable risk of inducing  
an untrue statement or influencing  an accused to make a 
confession regardless of guilt .  See State v. Cabagbag, 127 
Hawaii 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012) (relying on scientific studies 
to require a specific jury instruction regarding factors to 
consider in evaluating the reliability of eyewitness 
identifications).  Thus, inculpatory statements elicited during 
a custodial interrogation from a suspect whom  has previously 
been given falsified polygraph results in the interrogation 
                     
 26 https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/norfolk -four-pardoned-
20-years-after-false-confessions/ [https://perma.cc/J929 -N96Y].   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
35 
 process are coercive per se and are inadmissible at trial. 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73.   
  Accordingly, based on the foregoing, the  circuit court 
erred in determining that Det. Kuaana’s falsification of the 
polygraph test results was not a falsehood and in admitting 
evidence of Matsumoto’s confession .   
2. The Admission of Matsumoto’s Confession  Was Not Harmless Error 
 
  E rroneously admitted evidence is evaluated under the 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard.  State v. McCroy, 
104 Hawaii 203, 210, 87 P.3d 275, 282 (2004).  Under this  
standard, “[t]he relevant question . . . is whether there is a 
reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to 
[the] conviction.”  State v. Kim , 140 Hawaii 421, 434 n.15, 402 
P.3d 497, 510 n.15 (2017) (quoting State v. Han, 130 Hawaii 83, 
93, 306 P.3d 128, 138 (2013)).  Here,  Matsumoto’s confession was 
contrary to his testimony at trial in which he denied the sexual 
nature of his conduct in touching the CW.  The confession likely 
detrimentally affected Matsumoto’s credibility in the minds of 
the jury and thus there is a reasonable possibility that this 
evidence may have contributed to Matsumoto’s conviction.   State 
v. Kazanas , 138 Hawaii 23, 41, 375 P.3d 1261, 1279 (2016) 
(holding that where the case turned on the credibility of the 
defense’s witness versus the State’s, the improper admission of ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
36 
 a statement which harmed credibility was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt).  Accordingly, the circuit court’s error was 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.   27
B. Exclusion of Evidence of the Circumstances Surrounding the 
Eliciting of Matsumoto’s Confession28 
  The due process guarantee of the Hawai ʻi Constitution 
serves “to protect the right of an accused in a criminal case to 
a fundamentally fair tr ial,” and “[c]entral to the protections 
of due process is the right to be accorded ‘a meaningful 
opportunity to present a complete defense.’”29  State v. Tetu, 
                     
27 Matsumoto asserts that the court erroneously denied his motion 
for judgment of acquittal.  However, by presenting evidence after his motion 
was denied, Matsumoto waived any error made by the circuit court in denying 
the motion.  State v. Calaycay, No. SCWC- 17-0000386, 2019 WL 4010192, at *6 
(Haw. Aug. 26, 2019).  Accordingly, we instead review whether the State 
presented sufficient evidence to support the conviction.  We review the trial 
record to determine whether, when considered in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, there was substantial evidence to support the conviction.  State 
v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248 -49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) .  Here, Ullom 
testified that he saw Matsumoto “inappropriately touch” the CW ’s buttocks and 
the CW testified that Matsumoto grabbed her buttocks in a manner that 
made her uncomfortable.  This evidence is of “sufficient quality and 
probative value to enable a [person] of reasonable caution” to reach a 
conclusion as to the elements of the charged offense and to support the 
conviction.  Id.   
 28 Our determination that police deception as to the polygraph test 
results was coercive per se essentially resolves the appeal in this case.  
Nonetheless, we address whether the circuit court erred in excluding 
Matsumoto from testifying as to the totality of the circumstances surrounding 
his confession to enable the jury to assess its probative weight and 
reliability because of the likelihood of the recurrence of this issue in 
future cases and in light of the ICA’s resolution of this point on appeal.   
 29 Article I, sections 5 and 14 of the Hawai ‘i Constitution provide 
in relevant part the following:  
Section 5.   No person shall be deprived of life, liberty 
or property without due process of law[.]  
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
37 
 139 Hawai i 207, 219, 386 P.3d 844, 856 (2016);  State v. Matafeo, 
71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990) (quoting California 
v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479, 485 (1984)).  Matsumoto asserts that 
the failure to allow him to adduce the facts and circumstances 
surrounding his confession violated his rights to present a 
defense and to confront witnesses under the U nited States 
Constitution and the Hawaiʻi Constitution.   
  Matsumoto argues that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in precluding him from adducing evidence at trial 
that his post-polygraph statements were induced by Det. Kuaana’s 
misrepresentation that he did not pass the polygraph test.  
Despite the general rule that evidence of polygraph 
test results 
or a defendant’s refusal or willingness to submit to a polygraph 
examination is inadmissible, Matsumoto argues, there should be 
an exception to that prohibition “where such evidence is 
relevant to the credibility of a confession that is introduced 
by the State” based on this court’s decision in State v. 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
. . . . 
Section 14.   In all criminal prosecutions, the accused 
shall enjoy the right . . . to be confronted with the 
witnesses against the accused, . . . to have compulsory 
process for obtaining witnesses in the accused’s favor[.]  
Haw. Const. art I, §§ 5, 14. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
38 
 Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 505, 849 P.2d 58, 70 (1993).  In 
response, the State points to the “per se rule of exclusion” 
regarding polygraph test evidence and contends that “the 
potential for prejudice resulting from the jury knowing 
[Matsumoto] had an inconclusive result with regard to the 
polygraph test would far outweigh any probative value that such 
evidence might have in determining the voluntariness or 
involuntariness of his subsequently obtained statement.”    
  In Kelekolio, this court explained the difference 
between determining a statement’s “admissibility ( i.e., whether 
the confession or inculpatory statement was voluntarily given),” 
which is a question for the court, and determining the weight 
and effect of the confession or inculpatory statement with 
regard to its credibility and reliability (i.e. , its worthiness 
of belief),” which is a question for the jury.  See 74 Haw. at 
518, 849 P.2d at 76 (emphasis omitted).   Consequently, a 
defendant has “the right to put before the jury, as the trier of 
fact, all evidence, including the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the making of his confession, ‘relevant to weight or 
credibility.’”  Id. at 516, 849 P.2d at 75 (quoting Hawai ’i Rules 
of Evidence (HRE) Rule 104(e) (1985)).   
  The Supreme Court in Crane v. Kentucky  emphasized that 
credibility questions, “whether of a witness or of a confession, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
39 
 are for the jury,” and a defendant has a “traditional 
prerogative to challenge the confession’s reliability during the 
course of the trial.”30  476 U.S. 683, 688 (1986) (citing Jackson 
v. Denno, 378 U.S. 368, 386 n.13 (1964)).  Accordingly, 
“evidence about the manner in which a confession was secured 
will often be germane to its probative weight, a matter that is 
exclusively for the jury to assess.”  Id.  Specifically, “the 
physical and psychological environment that yielded the 
confession can [] be of substantial relevance to the ultimate 
factual issue of the defendant’s guilt or innocence.”  Id. at 
689.  Even voluntary confessions “are not conclusive of guilt[,] 
[a]nd, as with any other part of the prosecutor’s case, a 
confession may be shown to be ‘insufficiently corroborated or 
otherwise . . . unworthy of belief.’”  Id. (last alteration in 
original) (quoting Lego v. Twomey , 404 U.S. 477, 485 –86 (1972)).   
  The Crane court explained that “a defendant’s case may 
stand or fall on [the defendant’s] ability to convince the jury 
that the manner in which the confession was obtained casts doubt 
on its credibility.”  Id.  Thus, if a defendant is “stripped of 
                     
 30 Crane involved a juvenile whose confession was admitted at trial.  
476 U.S. at 684- 85.  At trial, the juvenile sought to introduce testimony 
about the environment in which he made the confession to show that the 
confession was unworthy of belief, but the trial court ruled the testimony 
inadmissible.  Id. at 685-86.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
40 
 the power to describe to the jury the circumstances that 
prompted [the] confession, the defendant is effectively disabled 
from answering the one question every rational juror needs 
answered: If the defendant is innocent, why did [the defendant] 
previously admit [] guilt?”  Id.   
  At the suppression hearing, Det. Kuaana and Matsumoto 
both testified that Det. Kuaana told Matsumoto that he “did not 
pass” the polygraph test.  Before the trial began, the circuit 
court ruled that there was to be no mention of the word 
“polygraph” or the word “test” and that the parties were not to 
say that the statement was a “material misrepresentation.”  The 
court stated it would only allow witnesses to say that Det. 
Kuaana made a statement that was not “totally true.”  The court 
did not permit Matsumoto to testify or elicit from Det. Kuaana 
that the not “totally true” statement was in regard to 
Matsumoto’s polygraph test results.   
  At trial, within the strictures of the court’s ruling, 
Det. Kuaana testified that he provided Matsumoto “ with some 
information that was not completely accurate.”  Matsumoto 
likewise testified that Det. Kuaana gave him “information that 
[he] later on found out was not completely accurate” and that 
there was “no doubt” that the information was not completely 
accurate.  Based, in part, on this “misleading or inaccurate ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
41 
 information,” Matsumoto testified that he “started doubting what 
[he] could recall.”  There was no other testimony concerning 
what Det. Kuaana told Matsumoto regarding the polygraph test.   
  The jury also heard testimony from Det. McCumsey and 
Det. Kuaana that Matsu moto admitted to grabbing the CW’s 
buttocks while she was watching one of the wrestling matches and 
heard from Det. Kuaana that Matsumoto had “change[d] his 
statement and admitted to” grabbing the CW’s buttocks.  These 
statements, the jury further heard, were made after Matsumoto 
was told something that was not “completely accurate.”    
  Thus, the jury received the testimony of the 
detectives that Matsumoto admitted to grabbing the CW’s buttocks 
while she was watching the match, and they heard testimony that 
Matsumoto was told something that was not “completely accurate.”  
What the jury did not have, however, was exactly what Matsumoto 
was told before he made inculpatory statements: that he did not 
pass the polygraph test.   
  The jury was not able to hear from Matsumoto as to the 
physical and mental effect of first being attached to a machine 
that purports to discern lies from the truth, being subjected to 
the polygraph test, and then being told that he did not pass the 
test, essentially indicating that Matsumoto lied.  There is no 
comparison between, on the one hand, an explanation that ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
42 
 (continued . . .)  Matsumoto confessed because he was told something that was not 
“completely accurate,” and, on the other, an explanation that he 
confessed because he was told that he did not pass a polygraph 
test conducted by a police detective who specifically questioned 
him on the nature of his conduct.   
  As a result of the circuit court’s ruling, Matsumoto 
was unable to exercise his “ right to put before the jury . . . 
all evidence, including the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the making of his confession , ‘relevant to weight or 
credibility.’”  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 516, 849 P.2d at 75 
(quoting HRE Rule 104(e) (1985)).  Matsumoto was not permitted 
to adequately explain why he made the inculpatory statements, 
“the one question every rational juror needs answered.”  Crane, 
476 U.S. at 689.31  Without being allowed to fully explain the 
                     
 31 This court has observed that, “It would appear, at least in the 
absence of stipulation, that the courts almost uniformly reject the results 
of lie detector tests when offered in evidence for the purpose of 
establishing the guilt or innocence of one accused of a crime, whether the 
accused or the prosecution seeks its introduction .”  State v. Chang, 46 Haw. 
22, 32, 374 P.2d 5, 11 (1962), overruled on other grounds by  State v. 
Okumura, 78 Hawaii 383, 894 P.2d 80 (1995).  The Chang court explained that , 
“Courts do not consider the polygraph or lie detector sufficiently perfected 
nor the interpretation of results in its use reliable enough to permit 
testimony respecting such a test to be ad mitted in evidence.”  Id. at 31, 374 
P.2d at 11; accord Okumura, 78 Hawai i at 397, 894 P.2d at 94 (“ According to 
well-established precedent in this jurisdiction, polygraph results are not 
admissible at trial whether offered by the prosecution or the defense 
. . . .”) abrogated on other grounds by  State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai i 302, 
277 P.3d 1027 (2012); State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 357, 615 P.2d 101, 109 
(1980) (same).   
  None of these cases, however, concerned the “ right to put before 
the jury . . . all evidence, including the facts and circumstances 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
43 
 circumstances surrounding his confession, the jury was unable to 
make an informed determination regarding the credibility, 
reliability, and the weight to be given to Matsumoto’s 
inculpatory statements.  Kelekolio , 74 Haw. at 518, 849 P.2d at 
76.  The circuit court’s decision to preclude Matsumoto from 
adducing evidence that his post -polygraph test statements were 
induced by Det. Kuaana, including being told that he did not 
pass the polygraph test, severely compromised Matsumoto’s 
constitutional right to a fair trial under a rticle I, section 5 
and to present a complete defense under article I, section 14 of 
the Hawai i Constitution.32  Therefore, the circuit court erred 
and the ICA also erred in affirming the circuit court’s ruling.33 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
surrounding the making of his confession, ‘relevant to weight or 
credibility.’”  Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 516, 849 P.2d at 75.  Any concerns of 
possible prejudice to the parties may be met by a limiting instruction to the 
jury that the evidence as to the polygraph was admitted solely for the jurors 
to consider the circumstances surrounding the making of the confession in 
order to determine weight or credibility of the confession.  See, e.g., 
People v. Melock, 599 N.E.2d 941, 960 (Ill. 1992); People v. Rosemond, 790 
N.E.2d 416, 425 (Ill. App. Ct. 2003); State ex rel. Kemper v. Vincent, 191 
S.W.3d 45, 52 (Mo. 2006); State v. Melvin, 319 A.2d 450, 460 n.2 (N.J. 1974); 
Crumpton v. Commonwealth, 384 S.E.2d 339, 343 (Va. Ct. App. 1989).   
 
 32 Several courts in other jurisdictions have considered cases 
involving circumstances similar to this case.  Crumpton, 384 S.E.2d at 343 
(holding that a jury cannot appreciate the significance of a confession 
unless the defendant was able to “fully explain the surrounding circumstances 
and reasons” that he altered his prior statement after a polygraph had been 
conducted); State v. Schaeffer, 457 N.W.2d 194, 19 6 (Minn. 1990) (holding 
that “if the trial court admits the confession, the trial court ‘must permit 
the jury to hear evidence on the circumstances surrounding the making of the 
confession . . . for a determination of weight and credibility’” thus 
allowing the defense to present evidence that the defendant confessed only 
 
(continued . . .)  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
44 
 C. Jury Instruction 
A. “Intimate Parts” Instruction Was Flawed  
  “It has long been held that it is the judge’s duty to 
ensure that all jury instructions cogently explain the law 
applicable to the facts in the case before it.”  State v. 
Taylor, 130 Hawai i 196, 210, 307 P.3d 1142, 1156 (2013).  “This 
court has repeatedly stated that ‘it is the duty of the circuit 
judge to see to it that the case goes to the jury in a clear and 
intelligent manner,’” so that the jurors may have a clear and 
correct understanding of what it is they are to decide.  Id.  
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
after being told he failed a polygraph test); Melock, 599 N.E.2d at 956, 960 
(holding that “a defendant in a criminal case has a right at trial to present 
evidence concerning the circumstances of his confession” and that “polygraph 
evidence should have been admitted for the limited purpose of determining the 
credibility and reliability of the confession”).   
 33 Matsumoto also argues that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in providing the jury with obviously redacted transcripts of the 
video recordings of his interrogations as there is a possibility that the 
redactions invited speculation from the jury as to the omitted content and 
that there is a substantial risk that the jury would ignore the court’s 
limiting instruction not to speculate.  While we decline  to resolve the issue 
in light of our disposition on other issues, we note that a redacted 
transcript does not guarantee a defendant protection from prejudice created 
by the redactions.  Redacted transcripts, particularly where the redactions 
are as pronounced as in this case, may have the effect of drawing the jury’s 
attention to those omitted portions and may invite speculation on the part of 
the jury as to the omitted content.  Because of this legitimate risk, a trial 
court should evaluate the nature of a transcript redaction in accordance with 
the general standards of HRE Rule 403’s probative value test.  In this case, 
for example, the court may have considered whether the video recordings were 
easily understandable without the transcript, whether the State could have 
readily modified the transcript to make the redactions of the transcript less 
prominent or minimize any potential prejudice (as was done with the 
meticulously modified video recording of the interrogations), and whether the 
blacked out passages could have been interpreted by the jury in a manner 
prejudicial to the defense.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
45 
 (quoting State v. Feliciano, 62 Haw. 637, 643, 618 P.2d 306, 310 
(1980)); accord State v. Bovee, 139 Hawai i 530, 540, 394 P.3d 
760, 770 (2017).   
  In this case, the circuit court gave, over Matsumoto’s 
objection, the following instruction to the jury: 
 “Sexual contact” means any touching other than acts 
of sexual penetration of the sexual or other intimate  parts 
of a person not married to the actor or of the sexual or 
other intimate  parts of the actor by the person, whether 
directly or through the clothing  or other material intended  
to cover the sexual or other intimate  parts. 
 
 “Sexual parts” means sexual organs. 
 
 “Intimate  parts” means the buttocks and those parts 
of the body typically associated  with sexual relations.  
 
 In considering whether the part of the body touched 
is a sexual or other intimate part, you must consider  the 
context in which the contact occurred.  
(Emphasis added.)  Matsumoto objected, maintaining that he was 
requesting his proposed instruction because it more accurately 
reflected the statement in State v. Silver that “a body part 
which might be a sexual or other intimate part in one context 
might not be in another.”  Matsumoto further argued that the 
court’s instruction was not specific enough, it did not fully 
describe context, and it did not include the limiting language 
relating to consideration of context for each individual 
incident.  In setting forth his objection to the court’s 
instruction, Matsumoto specifically incorporated his written 
arguments submitted in support of his proposed instruction 3, ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
46 
 which emphasized that “it is critical that [the] jury understand 
that not any touching of the buttocks is automatically sexual 
contact.”   
a. The instruction contained a misstatement of law 
  It appears that the initial error in the circuit 
court’s instruction originates from its misapprehension of our 
decision in State v. Silver
, 125 Hawai i 1, 249 P.3d 1141 (2011).  
There, the defendant argued that there was nothing in the sexual 
assault statutes that suggested that the legislature considered 
the buttocks to be an “intimate part” within the meaning of 
“sexual contact” as defined in HRS § 707 -700.  Id. at 6, 249 
P.3d at 1146.  This court examined the plain language of HRS 
§ 707–700 and concluded that the provision “does not indicate 
whether the legislature considered the buttocks to be a part of 
the body typically associated with sexual relations.”  Id. at 7, 
249 P.3d at 1147.  However, in reviewing the legislative history 
of section 707–700 , as well as engaging in an  in pari materia 
reading of HRS § 712 –1210, we concluded that “the legislature 
intended the buttocks to be an ‘ intimate  part’ for purposes of 
‘sexual contact’ as that phrase is defined in section 707 –700.”  
Id.  In support of its conclusion, the Silver court cited the 
following statement from State  v. Kalani : “This court has noted 
that the definitions of ‘sexual contact’ under HRS § 707 –700 and ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
47 
 ‘sexual conduct’ under HRS § 712 –1210 were both ‘adopted 
expressly for use in penal statutes regulating conduct with 
sexual connotations ’ and construed the two statutes with 
reference to one another.”  Id. (emphasis added)  (quoting 108 
Hawaii 279, 286, 118 P.3d 1222, 1229 (2005)).  Thus, the Silver  
court held that the buttocks may be an intimate part under the 
definition of “sexual contact” provided the conduct involving 
the buttocks is associated with “sexual connotations” or “sexual 
relations.”  Id.  The Silver court emphasized this holding by 
quoting from the ICA decision in the same case, which 
“cautioned” that “ a ‘body part which migh t be intimate in one 
context, might not be in another [context].’”  Id.  (citing 
State v. Silver, 123 Hawai i 299, 233 P.3d 719 (App. 2010) 
(unpublished table decision)).  This court further quoted from 
the ICA decision as follows:  
with respect to the buttocks, it is not uncommon for youth 
team coaches to give their players a congratulatory pat on 
the buttocks  in recognition of a good play or outstanding  
effort.  Parents  hugging or carrying  a young child may also 
place their hands on the child’s buttocks.  In these 
situations,  adults are knowingly  touching the buttocks  of 
another person who is less than fourteen years old.  But 
because of the context, it would be unreasonable to regard 
the child’s buttocks as an “intimate  part” for purposes  of 
applying the sexual assault statutes.  In these contexts,  
the child’s buttocks would not be a body part “typically  
associated  with sexual relations .” 
 ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
48 
 Id. (emphasis added) (quoting Kalani, 108 Hawai i at 284 –85, 118 
P.3d at 1227–28).34   
  In this case, the circuit court instructed the jury 
that intimate parts means the buttocks.  In doing so, the court 
effectively told the jury that, as a matter of law, the buttocks 
is an intimate part of the body.  This statement is plainly 
contrary to our holding in Silver.  The circuit court apparently 
relied upon statements in the Silver decision that indicate that 
the legislature intended the buttocks to be included within 
“intimate parts” as that term is used in “sexual contact.”35  See 
Silver, 125 Hawai i at 7, 249 P.3d at 1147.  But the fact that 
                     
 34 The Silver  court next considered whether there was substantial 
evidence to support the defendant’s convictions.  125 Hawai i at 7, 249 P.3d 
at 1147.  With regard to the late night massages, the minor testified that, 
while the defendant slept next to him, the defendant woke him up at least 
three different times by rubbing his buttocks and whispering to him.  Id.  
Based on such evidence, this court conc luded that the defendant’s conduct 
“constituted the touching of an ‘ intimate part’ of Minor’s body.”  Id.  On 
the other hand, as to conduct in the pool that the minor described as the 
defendant holding “[k]ind of like my crotch to throw me or under my butt  to 
throw me,” the context of the conduct as occurring during horseplay in a pool 
was insufficient as a matter of law to support a conviction.  Id.  at 8, 249 
P.3d at 1148.  The key to this court’s ruling was that the conduct was not 
demonstrated to have sexual connotations or be associated with sexual 
relations but, instead, involved horseplay.  Id. at 8-9, 249 P.3d at 1148 -49.   
 
 35 We have repeatedly cautioned, “It is not every statement of the 
law found in a text- book or opinion of a judge, however well and accurately 
put, which can properly be embodied in an instruction.”  Territory v. Cutad, 
37 Haw. 182, 186 (Haw. Terr. 1945) (quoting Garfield v. State, 74 Ind. 60, 
63-64 (1881)); State v. Clyde, 47 Haw. 345, 357, 388 P.2d 846, 853 (1964); 
accord In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai i 443, 468, 979 P.2d 39, 64 (1999).  
This caveat is even more salient when the statement is not a statement of law 
but, instead, is a part of the court’s reasoning leading to the court’s 
decision. 
   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
49 
 the legislature had no intention to exclude  the buttocks from 
“intimate parts” is a completely different proposition than the 
conclusive statement that “intimate parts ” means the buttocks.   
The circuit court’s  instruction therefore misstated the law 
insofar as it necessarily included the buttocks within the 
meaning of “[i]ntimate parts.”36 
b. The instruction was ambiguous and incomplete 
  Matsumoto also argues that the circuit court’s 
instruction was not specific enough  and did not provide the 
meaning of context.   
  As stated, the circuit court instructed the jury as 
follows: 
 
 “Intimate  parts” means the buttocks and those parts 
of the body typically associated  with sexual relations.  
 
 In considering whether the part of the body touched 
is a sexual or other intimate part, you must consider  the 
context in which the contact occurred . 
(Emphasis added.)   
  The court’s instruction was deficient in that the 
court failed to inform the jury that the touching of the 
buttocks must be associated with sexual relations or have sexual 
connotations in order for the buttocks to be an intimate part.  
                     
36 The circuit court’s misstatement of law that “‘[i] ntimate parts’ 
means the buttocks” was not corrected.  The jury was never expressly 
instructed that an intimate part does not mean the buttocks under certain 
circumstances.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
50 
 See Silver, 125 Hawai i at 7, 249 P.3d at 1147 (concluding that 
for a part of the body to be considered an “intimate part” as 
used in HRS § 707-700, it must be associated with sexual 
relations); Kalani, 108 Hawai i at 284-85, 118 P.3d at 1227-28 
(same).  Thus, the context the jury considered may have had 
nothing to do with whether the conduct was associated with 
sexual relations or sexual connotations, and the fact that the 
touching occurred in a high school athletic setting may have 
been considered as a context sufficient to render the buttocks 
an intimate part.37   
  Relatedly, the jury was also never instructed that a 
part of the body which might be sexual or intimate in one 
context might not be in another.  This was a significant 
omission given the circuit court’s erroneous statement that the 
                     
 37 Matsumoto also argues that the jury should have been instructed, 
pursuant to Silver, to limit its consideration of “context” to the alleged 
touching at the wrestling mat.  In Silver, this court disagreed with the 
ICA’s conclusion that a rational jury could infer a connection between 
touching in a pool and late night massages in the home.  125 Hawai i at 4, 8-
9, 249 P.3d at 1144, 1148 -49.  The defendant’s subsequent conduct during the 
massages, we reasoned, did not turn the defendant’s earlier conduct in the 
pool--which was “otherwise not actionable” --into a criminal offense.  
Id. at 
8-9, 249 P.3d at 1148 -49.  The ICA’s conclusion, this court stated, relied on 
“conduct that occurred at a later time, in a different setting, and which was 
the basis for three separate counts of sexual assault.”  Id. at 8, 249 P.3d 
at 1148.   
  In this case, the CW testified about two occasions when Matsumoto 
touched her; however, she characterized one of those occasions as 
“accidental.”  It does not appear that the State sought to infer a connection 
from the conduct that occurred by the wrestling mat to the conduct that the 
CW testified was accidental.  However, on remand, the circuit court should 
address this aspect of context in its instructions.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
51 
 buttocks is an intimate part as a matter of law.  The omission 
had the detrimental effect of increasing the ambiguity of the 
instruction.   
Here, the circuit court’s jury instruction contained a 
misstatement of law and was ambiguous and incomplete.  Thus, the 
ICA erred in concluding that Matsumoto’s argument pertaining to 
the jury instructions was without merit.38  On remand, the  
instruction on “intimate part” should cogently explain the law 
applicable to the facts in this case.  Taylor, 130 Hawaii at 
210, 307 P.3d at 1156.    
V. CONCLUSION 
  Accordingly, the ICA’s September 26, 2017 Judgment on 
Appeal and the circuit court’s June 27, 2014 Judgment of Guilty 
Conviction and Probation Sentence are vacated, and this case is 
                     
 38 The ICA ruled that Matsumoto’s argument relied on the assumption 
that the jury only followed the first part of  the court’s instruction that 
“‘[i]ntimate parts’ means the buttocks” and disregarded the second part 
requiring consideration of the context in which the contact occurred.  The 
ICA held that Matsumoto failed “to provide any evidence in support of this 
assumption” and that the jury is presumed to follow the court’s instructions.   
  Whether a jury instruction is flawed is not determined by whether 
the defendant is able “to provide any evidence in support of [an] assumption” 
that the jury followed a flawed portion of the instruction.  Even assuming 
that the circuit court’s instruction in its entirety was not technically 
flawed, “[t]he ‘(q) uestion on review of instructions is not whether they were 
technically correct but whether defendant could have suffered prejudice on 
their account.’”  State v. Napeahi, 57 Haw. 365, 377, 556 P.2d 569, 576 
(1976).  Given the contradictory nature of the court’s instruction, it is not 
possible to determine which portion of the instruction the jury followed.  
Additionally, the instruction was ambiguous and incomplete for the reasons 
discussed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
52 
 remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion.   
 
David M. Hayakawa 
for petitioner 
 
Chad M. Kumagai 
(Stephen K. Tsushima with him 
on the briefs) 
for respondent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna
 
/s/ Richard W. Pollack 
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
