***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
 
DEUTSCHE BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY,  AS TRUSTEE OF RESIDENTIAL 
ASSET SECURITIZATION TRUST 2006-A8, MORTGAGE PASS -THROUGH 
CERTIFICATES SERIES 2006- H UNDER THE POOLING AND SERVICING 
AGREEMENT DATED JUNE 1, 2006,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
MICHAEL C. GREENSPON,  
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant.  
 
 
SCWC-14-0001137 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-14-0001137; DC-CIVIL NO. 10-1-2608) 
 
SEPTEMBER 17, 2018 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, POLLACK,  AND WILSON, JJ. 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY POLLACK, J . 
  This case consider s whether a motion for sanctions may 
be dismissed without prejudice when  the underlying facts and 
issues allegedly establishing the sanctionable conduct are also 
at issue in another pending case involving the same parties.  We 
also consider whether 
a final order must be signed by a district Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-14-0001137
17-SEP-2018
09:01 AM***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
2 court clerk or judge for an appeal to lie from that order.  We 
conclude that the trial court acted within its proper discretion 
when it dismissed the motion for sanctions without prejudice.  
We further hold that the signature of a court clerk or judge is 
generally necessary for appellate review of a final order.  In 
the circumstances of this case, however, we determine  that other  
signed filings related to the order being appealed were 
sufficient to provide appellate jurisdiction.  
I. BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
  On March 31, 2003, Michael C. Greenspon obtained a 
loan from IndyMac Bank, F.S.B. (IndyMac) that was secured by a 
mortgage (the Mortgage) encumbering the property acquired by 
Greenspon (the P roperty) .  The Mortgage states that the 
promissory note for the loan  (the Note) was made payable to 
IndyMac, and it identifies IndyMac as the mortgagee/lender.  On 
July 11, 2008, IndyMac was closed by the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC).  Upon IndyMac’s closure, IndyMac 
Federal Bank, F.S.B. (IndyMac Federal) was assigned  IndyMac’s 
interest in the Mortgage.    
  In late 2008,  Greenspon defaulted on the Note.   
IndyMac Federal subsequently instituted a non -judicial 
foreclosure sale.  A notice of f oreclosure was recorded in  the 
Bureau of Conveyances,  and a public auction of the Property was 
scheduled.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
3   The foreclosure auction was conducted i n early 2010.   
An affidavit regarding the foreclosure sale (Affidavit of Sale) 
identified “FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Federal Bank, FSB” as 
mortgagee and Greenspon as mortgagor.   The highest bidder at the 
auction was listed as “Deutsche Bank National Trust Company” 
(Deutsche Bank).   A deed was filed in the Bureau of Conveyances, 
identifying the grantor as FDIC as Receiver for “In dyMac Bank, 
FSB” and the g rantee as Deutsche Bank (the Deed) .  Deutsche Bank 
then mailed a written notice to vacate to the occupants of the 
Property.   Greenspon remained on the premises. 
A. Ejectment Complaint , Motion for Summary Judgment, and 
Motion to Dismiss 
Deutsche Bank filed a Verified Complaint for Ejectment  
(ejectment a ction) against Greenspon in the District Court of 
the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division (district court) seeking a 
judgment and writ of possession  for the P roperty.  Deutsche Bank 
subsequently filed a Motion for Summary Judgment and Writ of 
Possession (Motion for Summary Judgment) asserting  that, through 
its purchase at the non- judicial foreclosure sale, it became the 
fee simple owner of the Property and was entitled to possession.   
  In response to the Motion for Summary Judgment, 
Greenspon filed a m otion to dismiss based on l ack of subject 
matter jurisdiction by the district court and an opposition to 
the Motion for Summary Judgment (Motion to Dismiss).  Greenspon ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
4 challenged the validity of Deutsche Bank’s interest in the 
Property, arguing, inter alia, that IndyMac’s assignment of the 
Mortgage to IndyMac Federal was fraudulently conducted seven 
months after the FDI C’s closure  of IndyMac.  Further, Greenspon 
asserted, the Deed conflicted with the Affidavit of Sale because 
the Deed listed 
“FDIC as Receiver for IndyMac Bank, FSB” as the 
grantor whereas the Affidavit of Sale listed “FDIC as Receiver 
for IndyMac Federal, F.S.B.” as the mortgagee.   Thus, Greenspon 
contended, neither IndyMac nor IndyMac Federal had contractual 
authority to conduct the power of sale or the non- judicial 
foreclosure conveying the Property to Deutsche Bank.  Because 
title to the Property 
was in dispute, Greenspon concluded, 
summary judgment was inappropriate and the district court lacked 
jurisdiction under 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604- 5(d) 
(1993)1 to hear the case.   
  Greenspon also filed a c omplaint in the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (circuit court action ) naming  Deutsche 
Bank; IndyMac Federal; OneWest Bank, F.S.B.; and Cal-Western 
Reconveyance Corporation as defendants and asserting  various 
claims of fraud pertaining to the title of the Property.2   
                     
 1 HRS § 604 -5(d) provides in relevant part as follows: “The 
district courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in 
which the title to real estate comes in question . . . .”  
 2 The complaint in the circuit court action set forth five counts.  
Count One of the complaint alleged that Greenspon was entitled to a 
 
(continued .  . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
5   At the hearing on the  Motion for Summary Judgment,3 
Greenspon requested that the district court take judicial notice 
of his circuit court action.  The district court accepted a copy 
of the circuit court action complaint, but, finding Deutsche 
Bank had met its burden for summary judgment, orally granted 
Deutsche Bank’s Motion for Summary Judgment .   
  Deutsche Bank 
subsequently filed  its opposition to 
Greenspon’s Motion to Dismiss.   Deutsche Bank argued that the 
oral ruling granting Deutsche Bank summary judgment rendered the 
Motion to Dismiss moot.   
  T he district court, however, granted Greenspon’ s 
Motion to Dismiss and dismissed the case without prejudice 
(Dismissal Order).4  The Dismissal Order stated that the district 
court had taken judicial notice of the c ircuit court action and 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
declaratory judgment that the non -judicial foreclosure sale and subsequent 
transfer of title to Deutsche Bank were void and unenforceable as procured by 
fraud and by unfair and/or deceptive predatory lending practices.  Count Two 
alleged that Greenspon was entitled to a declaratory judgment that the Note 
and Mortgage were void and unenforceable as procured by fraud.  Count Three 
alleged that the Note and Mortgage were void and unenforceable because they 
constituted unfair and deceptive acts and practices against consumers as 
defined by HRS Chapter 480.  Count Four requested that the court prohibit the 
defendants from further transferring title to the Property or further 
damaging Greenspon’s finances.  Count Five alleged that Greenspon was 
entitled to damages because the alleged mortgage fraud was done with criminal 
disregard for the finances and feelings of Greenspon.  
 3 The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.   
 4 The Honorable Judge Blaine J. Kobayashi presided over the Motion 
to Dismiss and subsequent proceedings. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
6 that the district court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over 
Deutsche Bank’s ejectment action because title to the P roperty 
was in dispute.  The district court also vacated the oral  ruling 
granting Deutsche Bank’s Motion for Summary Judgment.    
B. Greenspon’s Motion for Sanctions  
  
In June 2014, Greenspon submitted a motion for c osts 
and attorney’s  fees based upon  District C ourt Rules of C ivil 
Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 11  (1996)5 (Motion for Sanctions) for the 
filing of a “false verified complaint .”  Relying upon evidence 
and proceedings in the circuit court action, Greenspon argued 
that Deutsche Bank had no right to possession of the Property 
                     
 5 DCRCP Rule 11 provides in pertinent part as follows:  
Every pleading, motion, and other paper of a party 
represented by an attorney shall be signed by at least one 
attorney of record in that attorney’s individual name, 
whose address shall be stated.  A party who is not 
represented by an attorney shall sign the party’s pleading, 
motion, or other paper and state the party’s address.  . . .  
The signature of an attorney or party constitutes a 
certificate by the signatory that the signatory has read 
the pleading, motion, or other paper; that to the best of 
the signatory’s knowledge, information, and belief formed 
after reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is 
not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass 
or to cause unnecessary  delay or needless increase in the 
cost of litigation. . . .  If a pleading, motion, or other 
paper is signed in violation of this rule, the court, upon 
motion or upon its own initiative, shall impose upon the 
person who signed it, a represented party, or both, an 
appropriate sanction, which may include an order to pay to 
the other party or parties the amount of the reasonable 
expenses incurred because of the filing of the pleading, 
motion, or other paper, including a reasonable attorney’s 
fee. 
DCRCP Rule 11 (1996).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
7 and that its counsel negligently and recklessly failed to make 
any reasonable inquiry into the validity of Deutsche Bank’s 
title claims prior to filing the ejectment action.6  Thus, 
Greenspon argued, sanctions against both Deutsche Bank and its 
counsel were necessary because the ejectment action lacked a 
factual basis, was frivolous, and was brought for improper 
purposes.  Accordingly, Greenspon requested that the district 
court impose DCRCP Rule 11 sanctions and enter an award for all 
attorney’s fees and costs Greenspon incurred in defending the 
ejectment action, with interest.   
  In response, 
Deutsche Bank argued that its claims were 
not frivolous and that the district court granted Greenspon’s 
Motion to Dismiss primarily to allow the circuit court action to 
be fully litigated and resolved.  
Any issues regarding title 
raised by Greenspon in the Motion for Sanctions
, Deutsche Bank 
maintained, were determinations made in the circuit court action 
that was then pending appeal and were thus beyond the district 
                     
 6 Specifically, Greenspon pointed to answers by Deutsche Bank in 
response to interrogatories in the circuit court action that indicated 
Deutsche Bank had not been the highest bidder at the foreclosure auction, but 
rather had been designated by IndyMac Federal to take record title.  And, 
IndyMac Federal, according to Deutsche Bank’s response to the interrogatory, 
had made a credit bid and did not pay a cash dollar amount for the Property.  
Greenspon further submitted that Deutsche Bank admitted that IndyMac Federal 
was the foreclosing mortgagee, and that IndyMac Federal--not Deutsche Bank--
held physical possession of and controlled the Note at all times.  Greenspon 
additionally pointed to Deutsche Bank’s statement at the Motion for Summary 
Judgment hearing regarding the circuit court Verified Complaint that “the 
original deed was defective, that [the] defect was raised by [Greenspon], and 
it’s been cured.” ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
8 court’s jurisdiction.  Deutsche Bank therefore contended that 
the district court should not grant G reenspon’s Motion for 
Sanctions.7 
  The  district court held a hearing on the Motion for 
Sanctions and issued an order denying the motion without 
prejudice (Order Denying Sanc
tions).8  In a footnote in the 
order, the district court explained that the denial was without 
prejudice because the Motion for Sanctions raised issues of 
title that were pending appeal in Greenspon’s circuit court 
action: 
As represented by counsel for [Deutsche Bank] in the 
Opposition, Greenspon v. Deutsche Bank National Trust 
Company, CAAP -13-0001432, is currently on appeal.  As the  
Court understands, that case involves among other things, 
issues relating directly to the issue of title to the 
subject property.  The outcome of said appeal may have a 
direct bearing upon the instant case.  Accordingly, unless 
and until a decision has been made on said appeal, the 
[Motion for Sanctions] may be premature and is therefore 
being denied without prejudice.  
                     
 7 Greenspon also filed a supplemental memorandum in support of the 
Motion for Sanctions and a  reply to Deutsche Bank’s Opposition to the Motion 
for Sanctions.  Greenspon asserted that the claims in the Motion for 
Sanctions required different considerations from the circuit c ourt action, 
namely: the validity of Deutsche Bank’s title prior to filing the ejectment 
action; whether Deutsche Bank obstructed Greenspon’s discovery in the 
ejectment a ction; and whether Deutsche Bank’s counsel had engaged in reckless 
business practices. 
 8 Greenspon filed a motion for reconsideration of the dismissal of 
the Motion for Sanctions, which the court denied.  The ICA’s affirmance of 
the Order Denying Reconsideration is not raised in Greenspon’s application 
for a writ of certiorari and therefore is not further addressed.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
9 C. Greenspon’s Motion for Taxation of Costs  
  On September 
9, 2014, Greenspon filed  an ex parte 
request for taxation of costs  (Request for Costs) citing DCRCP 
Rule 54(d) (1996)9 and HRS §§ 607-910 and 607-13 (1993).11  
Greenspon also filed a proposed “Order Granting Prevailin g 
Defendant’s Ex Parte Request for Taxation of Costs” (Proposed 
Order for Costs).  In the Request for
 Costs, Greenspon stated 
                     
 9 DCRCP Rule 54(d) provides as follows:  
Costs.  Except when express provision therefor is made 
either in a statute or in these rules, costs shall be 
allowed as of course to the prevailing party unless the 
court otherwise directs; but costs against the State or a 
county, or an officer or agency of the State or a county, 
shall be imposed only to the extent permitted by law.  
Costs may be taxed by the clerk on 48 hours’ notice.  On 
motion served within 5 days thereafter, the action of the 
clerk may be reviewed by the court.  
 10 HRS § 607 -9 provides as follows:  
No other costs of court shall be charged in any court in 
addition to those prescribed in this chapter in any suit, 
action, or other proceeding, except as otherwise provided 
by law. 
All actual disbursements, including but not limited to, 
intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel, 
expenses for deposition transcript originals and copies, 
and other incidental expenses, including copying costs, 
intrastate long distance telephone charges, and postage, 
sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable 
by the court, may be allowed in taxation of costs.  In 
determining whether and what costs should be taxed, the 
court may consider the equities of the situation.  
 11 HRS § 607 -13 provides as follows:  
Whenever any cause or proceeding, other than criminal, 
probate, or divorce, is discontinued or dismissed in any 
court, the defendant therein shall be entitled to have the 
defendant’s traveling expenses, to be charged at the rate 
of 10 cents a mile each way in going to and returning from 
the court, taxed as costs.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
10 his costs as $1,695.61 through the termination of the ejectment 
action.  He provided  documentation supporting his request, 
including, inter alia, a copy of the minutes from a hearing on 
Deutsche Bank’s m otion for r econsideration of the order granting 
Greenspon’s Motion to Dismiss at which the court  indicated that 
it would consider a  request f or costs from Greenspon when 
submitted.   
  Deutsche Bank opposed the Request for  Costs, arguing 
that imposition of costs was inequitable because the district 
court had first orally granted Deutsche Bank ’s Motion for 
Summary J udgment and later reversed its rul ing.  Greenspon 
thereafter submitted a proposed “Judgment and Notice of Entry of 
Judgment” for an award of the requested costs (Proposed Judgment 
Regarding Costs) to the court.    
  On September 22, 2014, the district court stamped the 
Proposed Order for Costs “DENIED” and “FILED”  (Order Denying 
Request for Costs).   The next day , the district court stamped 
the Proposed Judgment Regarding Costs “DENIED” and “FILED” 
(Denial of Proposed Judgment).   Neither document was signed by a 
clerk or judge on the signature line provided for the “judge or 
clerk of the above- entitled court.”  
  The Denial of  Proposed Judgment is accompanied in the 
record on appeal by a Second Circuit preprinted “denial form” 
(Denial Form).  The Denial Form provides a blank line for a ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
11 civil case number that was filled in with “10 -1-2608” and bears 
a typewritten notation that reads,  “This document is denied for 
the following reason(s). ”  Various reasons for which a document 
may be denied are listed along with checkboxes to indicate the 
applicable reason for denial.  One of the checkboxes is 
designated “Other” and  includes lines upon which to write a 
reason.  The space for “Other” on the Denial Form was marked, 
and next to it was handwritten: “No judgment granted on 
Defendant’s Sept. 9, 20 14 Request for Taxation of Costs.”  
Underneath the signature line
 of the Denial Form is typewritten 
“Judge of the above -entitled Court,” and a handwritten signature 
appears on the signature line.12 
  Greenspon appealed
, inter alia, the district court’s 
Order Denying Sanctions and the Order Denying Request for Costs . 
II. ICA PROCEEDINGS 
  Greenspon and Deutsche Bank reasserted  their arguments 
related to the Motion for Sanctions to the I ntermediate C ourt of 
Appeals (ICA).  Regarding the denial of the Request for Costs, 
Greenspon contended that there is a strong presumption that 
costs will be awarded to the prevailing party and a court may 
not deny costs without explanation unless it is clear from the 
record that the denial of costs is justified.  Here, Greenspon 
                     
 12 The name reflected in the signature is unclear.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
12 argued, the district court failed to provide any reasoning for 
denying his Request for Costs.  Deutsche Bank responded that it 
would be inequitable to award Greenspon any costs because 
Greenspon filed the Request for Costs three years after the 
Motion to Dismiss was granted and because the district court had 
wrongfully vacated its ruling granting Deutsche Bank’s Motion 
for Summary Judgment prior to dismissing the case.  
  
On November 30, 2017, t he ICA issued a summary 
disposition order (SDO).13  As to the Order Denying Sanctions,  
the ICA noted that Greenspon’s circuit court action against 
Deutsche Bank asserted claims for wrongful foreclosure and quiet 
title; injunctive relief; unfair and deceptive acts and 
practices; and fraud.  The eviden ce Greenspon relied on t o 
question Deutsche Bank’s validity of title and right to 
possession in the Motion for Sanctions, the ICA stated, derived 
from discovery and filings in the circuit court action.  Thus, 
the ICA determined that the issues raised in the Motion for 
Sanctions were the subject of ongoing litigation and 
that the 
district court did not abuse its discretion by denying the 
Motion for Sanctions without prejudice.14   
                     
 13 The ICA’s SDO can be found at Deutsche Bank National  Trust Co. v. 
Greenspon, No. 14- 1137, 2017 WL 5899869 (Haw. App. Nov. 30, 2017).  
 14 The ICA stated in a footnote that it had resolved the appeal of 
the circuit c ourt action and issued a Memorandum Opinion on June 14, 2016.  
(Citing Greenspon v. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Tr. Co. , No. CAAP- 13-1432, 2016 WL 
 
(continued .  . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
13   Regarding the denial of Greenspon’s Request for C osts, 
the ICA found that it lacked jurisdiction to review the matter.  
The ICA described the Order Denying Request for Costs  from which 
Greenspon sought to appeal as a “taxation of costs document” 
stamped “DENIED” but without any signature by a district court 
clerk or judge.  Because the document lacked the district court 
clerk or judge’s signature  required under HRS § 604- 20 (2016),15 
the ICA stated it was not an order subject to appellate review 
under Hawai
ʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a) 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
3280366 (Haw. App. Jun. 14, 2016).)  There, the ICA had affirmed the circuit 
court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Deutsche Bank regarding 
Greenspon’s claims for wrongful foreclosure, unfair and deceptive acts and 
practices, and fraud, but it had vacated the circuit co urt’s rulings 
regarding Greenspon’s claim for quiet title and request for injunctive relief 
and remanded those claims for further proceedings.   
 15 HRS § 604 -20, “Powers of Clerk” provides as follows:  
The clerks of the district court shall have, within the  
scope of the jurisdiction of the district  courts, all the 
powers of clerks of other courts of record, including the 
power to sign and enter judgments, subject to the direction 
of the court; administer oaths; sign and issue garnishee 
summons, writs of attachment, execution and possession, and 
other process; and take depositions.  
HRS § 604- 20 (2016).  Although the notice of appeal in this case was filed on 
September 26, 2014, the ICA cited to the 2016 publication of HRS § 604 -20.  
Courts of other jurisdictions have long held that a court’s legal authority 
to hear a case is an ongoing inquiry that may change while the case is 
pending.  See, e.g., Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't , 523 U.S. 83, 
94 (1998) (citing Ex parte McCardle , 7 Wall. 506, 514 (U.S. 1868)).  Because 
the court rules and statutes relevant to the ICA’s jurisdiction did not 
change substantively in any way pertinent to this case during the pendency of 
Greenspon’s appeal, we assume without deciding that the ICA correctly 
concluded that the laws in effect at the time of the November 30, 2017 SDO 
provide the appropriate rules of decision regarding the ICA’s jurisdiction to 
hear the appeal. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
14 (2016), which requires an appeal from an “entry o f judgment or 
appealable order”.  The ICA accordingly held that it did not 
have jurisdiction to consider an ap peal of the Order Denying 
Request for Costs.   
  G reenspon filed,  and this court accepted,  an 
application for writ of certiorari from the ICA’s decision.   
III.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
  DCRCP Rule 11 is substantially similar to Hawai‘i Rules 
of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 11 (2000), and like HRCP Rule 11, 
“[a]ll aspects of a [DRCRP] Rule 11 determination should be 
reviewed under the  abuse of discretion standard. ”  Canalez v. 
Bob’s Appliance Serv. Ctr., Inc. , 89 Hawai ʻi 292, 300, 972 P.2d 
295, 303 (1999) (quoting Lepere v. United Pub. Workers , 77 
Hawaiʻi 471, 473, 887 P.2d 1029, 1031 (1995)).    
  A ruling on a request for taxation of costs pursuant 
to HRCP Rule 54(d) is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  Wong v. 
Takeuchi , 88 Hawaiʻi 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998).  
  "When interpreting rules promulgated by the court, 
principles of statutory construction apply.  Interpretation of a 
statute is a question of law which [the appellate court reviews] 
de novo."  Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 106 Hawai ʻi 325, 331,  
104 P.3d 9 12, 918 (2004) (italics, internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
15   Additionally, “t he existence of jurisdiction is a 
question of law that [is] review [ed] de novo under the 
right/wrong standard.”  Captain Andy’s Sailing, Inc. v. Dep’ t of 
Land & Natural Res. , 113 Hawaiʻ i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 833, 841 
(2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Motion for Sanctions 
  On certiorari, Greenspon asserts that the district  
court abused its discretion by not imposing DCRCP Rule 11  
sanctions on Deutsche Bank and its counsel for filing the  
ejectment action.16  Sanctions were necessary under DCRCP Rule 
11, Greenspon argues, based on the evidence he presented that 
Deutsche Bank lacked valid title to the Property and thus had no 
basis to bring the ejectment action.  Deutsche Bank responds  
that the district court properly denied the Motion for Sanctions 
because Greenspon’s claims regarding the validity of Deutsch e 
Bank’s title to the Property were the subject of ongoing 
litigation.  Further , Deutsche Bank asserts that the ICA 
appropriately found that Greenspon could continue to litigate 
his claims in circuit court and that Greenspon was not 
                     
 16 Greenspon also contends in his second question presented that the 
ICA erred by “giving the appearance of bias” and “prejudicially implying that 
[Greenspon] has no claim for wrongful foreclosure on remand.”  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
16 prejudiced by the denial of the Motion for Sanctions w ithout 
prejudice. 
  As stated, HRCP Rule 1117 is substantially similar to 
DCRCP Rule 11, and the body of case law interpreting HRCP Rule 
11 may therefore guide our  interpretation of its DCRCP 
counterpart .  Like HRCP Rule 11 , DCRCP Rule 11 requires the 
signatory to make reasonable inquiry into the facts of the case 
to ensure that “the filed document [is] supported by existing or  
discoverable evidence. ”  Fujimoto v. Au , 95 Hawai‘i 116, 151-53,  
19 P.3d 699, 735 -36 (2001).  DCRCP Rule 11 also requires the 
signatory to certify that the filing was not undertaken for an 
                     
 17 HRCP Rule 11 (2000), provides in relevant part as follows:  
(b) Representations to Court.   By presenting to the court . 
. . a pleading, written motion, or other paper, an attorney 
or unrepresented party is certifying that to the best of 
the person’s knowledge, information, and belief, formed 
after an inquiry reasonable under the circumstances:  
(1) it is not being presented for any improper 
purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary 
delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation;  
. . .  
(3) the allegations and other factual contentions 
have evidentiary support or, if specifically so 
identified, are  likely to have evidentiary support 
after a reasonable opportunity for further 
investigation or discovery;  
. . .  
(c) Sanctions.   If, after notice and a reasonable 
opportunity to respond, the court determines that 
subdivision (b) has been violated, the court may . . . 
impose an appropriate sanction upon the attorneys, law 
firms, or parties that have violated subdivision (b) or are 
responsible for the violation.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
17 “improper purpose” .18  The determination of whether these  
requirements have been met is fact intensive, requiring specific 
findings regarding the nature of the potentially sanctionable 
conduct and surrounding circumstances.  See  In re Hawaiian Flour 
Mills, Inc. , 76 Hawaii 1, 15, 868 P.2d 419, 433 (1994); Enos v. 
Pacific Transfer & Warehouse, Inc. , 79 Hawai i 452, 459, 903 P.2d 
1273, 1280 (1995).  Additionally, a trial court’s position “ on 
the front lines of litigation ” affords it insight into the  
practices of the local bar and the degree to which sanctions  
would promote DCRCP Rule 11’s goals of general and specific 
deterrence.  Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc. , 76 Hawai‘i at 15, 868  
P.2d at 433 (citing Cooter & Gell v. Hartmarx Corp. , 496 U.S.  
384, 404 (1990)); see also Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 106 
Hawai‘i 325, 341, 104 P.3d 912, 928 (2004) (holding that the  
primary purpose of Rule 11 sanctions is to deter misconduct, not 
to shift the burden of fees ).  A trial court’s decision as to 
                     
 18 HRCP Rule 11 contains an additional requirement that the 
signatory to a filing certify that  “the claims, defenses, and other legal 
contentions therein are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous 
argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law or the 
establishment of new law.”  A variation of this requirement was cont ained in 
HRCP Rule 11 when DCRCP Rule 11 was adopted in 1996.  See Lepere v. United 
Pub. Workers, Local 646, AFL -CIO, 77 Hawai‘ i 471, 473, 887 P.2d 1029, 1031 
(1995).  Although the commentary to DCRCP Rule 11 indicates the rule was 
intended to be a “verbatim” adoption of HRCP Rule 11 (save for small changes 
to make the language gender neutral) the text of DCRCP Rule 11 does not 
contain a requirement that a filing be supported by existing law or a good -
faith argument for a change of law.  Given this ambiguity, the District Court 
Civil Rules and Forms Committee may wish to consider amending DCRCP Rule 11 
or its commentary to clarify whether the omission was intentional.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
18 whether to impose sanctions is thus “due a substantial degree of  
deference, ” Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc. , 76 Hawai‘i at 15, 868 
P.2d at 433, and it will generally be upheld unless it “ exceeds 
the bounds of reason, all of the circumstances before it being 
considered.”  Gap , 106 Hawai ‘i at 339, 104 P.3d at  926 (quoting 
Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 79 Hawai‘i 452, 459 n. 
7, 903 P.2d 1273, 1280 n. 7 (1995)). 
  Here, the filed document under consideration is 
Deutsche Bank’s eject ment action.  A prima facie ejectment case 
requires, inter alia, a showing of valid title and right of 
possession to the subject property.  See Kondaur Capital Corp.  
v. Matsuyoshi, 136 Hawai i 227, 241, 361 P.3d 454, 468 (2015).   
In considering whether the ejectment action violated DCRCP Rule 
11, the district court would have been required to determine if  
Deutsche Bank and its counsel made reasonable inquiries into 
whether the action was “well grounded in fact.”   See Canalez v.  
Bob’s Appliance Serv. Ctr., Inc. , 89 Hawai i 292, 302, 972 P.2d 
295, 305 (1999) .  In evaluating the reasonableness of Deutsche 
Bank’s and counsel’s inquir ies, the district court would likely  
need to consider  many of the same factual issues surrounding 
Deutsche Bank’s  obtainment of the D eed that were also at play in 
the pending circuit court action. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
19   Further, the district court would have needed to 
consider whether the ejectment action was filed for an improper 
purpose, including as part of the larger fraudulent scheme that 
Greenspon alleges.  See Bank of Hawai i v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai i 
372, 390, 984 P.2d 1198, 1216 (1999) (defining bad faith as 
“actual or constructive fraud or a neglect or refusal to fulfill 
some duty . . . not prompted by an honest mistake as to one’s  
rights or duties, but by some interested or sinister motive”  
(citations omitted)) .  This would necessitate an evaluation of 
the validity of Deutsche Bank’s title to and right to possession 
of the Property--the same issues to be determined in the pending 
circuit court action.   
  
Therefore, the district court did not exceed the 
bounds of reason in determining that resolving the Motion for 
Sanctions prior to resolution of the circuit court action would 
be premature.  Further, because the Motion for Sanction was 
dismissed without prejudice, Greenspon was free to refile the 
motion for sanctions if appropriate after termination of the 
circuit court action.  Therefore, the district court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying the Motion fo
r Sanctions without 
prejudice.19   
                     
 19 Greenspon’s second question also contends that the ICA erred 
because it “neglected to an alyze the basis for the Rule 11 sanctions on the 
record evidence.”  However, the ICA correctly determined that the district 
 
(continued .  . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
20 B. Greenspon’s Request for Costs 
  Greenspon also maintains that the ICA erred in holding 
that it lacked appellate jurisdiction over the Order Denying 
Request for Costs because even though it was unsigned, the ICA 
should have taken notice of the Denial of Proposed Judgment with 
its accompanying Denial Form , which was  signed by a judge  and 
included in the record on appeal .  Together, Greenspon contends, 
these documents provided the ICA with jurisdiction over the 
Order Denying Request for Costs.  Finally, Greenspon asserts 
that, as the prevailing party , he is entitle d to an award of 
costs, and the district court improperly denied his Request for 
Costs without explanation.   
  Deutsche Bank res ponds that the ICA correctly found 
that it lacked jurisdiction under HRS § 604- 20 and HRAP Rule 
4(a) to hear the appeal because the Order Denying Request for 
Costs and Denial of Proposed Judgment lacked the signature of a 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
court exercised its informed discretion in deferring a substantive 
determination as to sanctions until interrelated factual issues were fully 
resolved in the circuit court action.   
  Additionally, Greenspon asks this court to consider whether the 
ICA gave the appearance of bias and prejudicially implied that Greenspon had 
no claim for wrongful foreclosure on remand, assuming that the Motion for 
Sanctions is remanded for hearing.  The SDO does not, however, reflect any 
indication of bias or appearance of prejudice regarding Greenspon’s claim for 
wrongful foreclosure.  Additionally, the ICA does not provide any comment on 
whether wrongful foreclosure occurred and merely notes that a portion of the 
circuit court action has been remanded to the circuit court.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
21 clerk or judge.  Deutsche Bank also argues that the award of 
costs to a prevailing party is discretionary, and thus, the ICA 
“could not err” in affirming the Order Denying Request for 
Costs.   
1. A District Court Clerk or Judge’s Signature is Necessary for 
an Appealable Order 
  
In determining whether the signature of a district 
court clerk or judge is generally necessary for an appellate 
court to have jurisdiction over an appeal 
of a filed district 
court order,20 we consider the statutes and rules of procedure 
governing appeals.  HRS § 641 -1(a) provides that “a ppeals shall 
be allowed in civil matters from all final judgments, orders, or 
decrees of circuit and district courts and the land court to the 
intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter 602. ”21  HRS § 
641-1 (2016).  Under HRAP Rule 4(a) (1), a notice of appeal in a 
civil case must be filed “ after entry of the judgment or 
appealable order.”  HRAP 4(a)(1).  Entry of an appealable order 
is defined by HRAP Rule 4(a)(5) as “ when a judgment or order  is 
filed in the office of the clerk of the court. ”  HRAP Rule 
4(a)(5).  Thus, the statu te and rule authoriz ing appeals to the 
                     
 20 In some instances, our court rules authorize a court to issue an 
oral ruling that is considered entered upon the filing of a corresponding 
notice of entry.  See, e.g. , HRPP Rule 44A (2011).  This opinion’s use of the 
term “order” encompasses a written notice of entry in these circumstances.  
 21 HRS Chapter 602 defines the composition and jurisdiction of 
Hawaii’s courts of appeals, in cluding the ICA and the Hawai ‘i Supreme Court.  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
22 ICA do not expressly provide that a signature is required for 
entry of an appealable order or final judgment.  
  Significantly, d istrict court clerks are empowered by 
statute to “sign and issue garnishee su mmons, writs of 
attachment, execution and possession, and other process” subject 
to the direction of the court.  HRS § 604- 20.  Further, Rule 10 
of the Hawai i Rules of District Court (HRDC), “Orders and 
Judgments Grantable by the Clerk,” provides that “th e clerk may 
grant, sign, and enter the following orders without further 
direction by the court. . .”  HRDC Rule 10 (1996).22  The 
inclusion of the word “sign” indicates that it is a distinct 
action separate from “granting” and “entering.”  See Franks v.  
City & County of Honolulu , 74 Haw. 328, 338, 843 P.2d 668, 673 
(1993) (“[N]o clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as 
                     
 22 HRDC Rule 10, Orders and Judgments Grantable by the Clerk, 
provides:  
The clerk may grant, sign, and enter the following orders 
without further direction by the court, but any orders so 
entered may be set aside or modified by the court:  
. . .   
(d) Judgments.  Default judgments as provided in Rule 
55(b)(1) and judgments pursuant to Rule 68 of the District 
Court Rules of Civil Procedure.  Attorneys’ fees may be 
awarded as provided by law.  
(e) Other orders.  Any other order referred to in the 
District Court Rules of Civil Procedure which is grantable 
of course by the clerk.  
HRDC Rule 10. ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
23 superfluous . . . if a construction can be legitimately found 
which will give force to and preserve all words of the 
stat
ute.”).  In setting forth how a clerk may grant an order or 
judgment in lieu of a judge, HRDC Rule 10 
indicates that a judge 
would similarly follow a three-step process, including granting 
an order, signing the order, and directing it to be entered.  
See
 HRDC Rule 10.  Signing the order is treated as a distinct 
step, and by describing all three steps, HRDC Rule 10 implies 
that each is a necessary 
part of the sequence that concludes 
with entry of the order
.   
  
HRDC Rule 2(e)23 also indicates that the signature of a 
clerk or judge is necessary for an entered order or judgment to 
have effect.  See HRDC Rule 2(e) (2012).  HRDC Rule 2(e) 
provides that a facsimile signature of the clerk or judge on an 
electronically filed order or judgment “has that same force and 
effect as if the judge or clerk had affixed the judge’s or 
                     
 23 HRDC Rule 2, Filing Procedure, subsection(e), Signature, 
provides: 
Any order or judgment that is filed electronically bearing 
a facsimile signature in lieu of an original signature of a 
judge or clerk has the same force and effect as if the 
judge or clerk had affixed the judge’s or clerk’s signature 
to a paper copy of the order or judgment and it had been 
entered on the docket in a conventional manner.  For 
purposes of this rule and any rules of court, the facsimile 
signature may be either an image of a handwritten signature 
or the software printed name of the judge preceded by /s/.  
HRDC Rule 2(e)(2012).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
24 clerk’s signature to a paper copy of the orde r or judgment and 
it had been entered on the docket in a conventional manner.”  
HRDC Rule 2(e).  The provision to ensure that a facsimile 
signature “has the same force and effect” indicates that a valid 
clerk or judge’s signature on an order or judgment gi ves an 
order or judgment “force” or “effect.”  HRDC Rule 2(e) .  
Additionally, the reference to entry of an order or judgment “in 
a conventional manner” indicates that a clerk or judge’s 
signature on an order or judgment is the “conventional”  
procedure.  See id.   
  Additionally, we have held that a written order 
becomes appealable when it is signed by a judge.  See State v. 
Bohannon, 102 Hawai i 228, 232  n.7, 236, 74 P.3d 980, 984  n.7, 
988 (2003).  In  Bohannon , this court considered whether the 
timeliness o f a prosecutor’s appeals were  based upon (1) the 
dates the written orders were filed; (2) when the orders were 
signed by the judge; or (3) the dates the orders were noted in 
the district court calendar. 
 Id. at 232, 234-35, 74 P.3d at 
984, 986-87 .  In our analysis, we compared HRAP Rule 4(b)(3) 
(1999)24 with Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
                     
 24 HRAP Rule 4(b)(3), “Entry of Judgment or Order” under the 
subsection “Appeals in Criminal Cases,” provide d: “[a] judgment or order is 
entered within the meaning of this subsection when it is filed with the clerk 
of the court.”  HRAP Rule 4(b)(3).  ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
25 44(b)(1) (2000),25 which also deal t with the entry of orders in 
penal proceedings.  Id. at 235 -36, 74 P.3d at 987-88.  We held 
that although under HRPP Rule 44 (b)(1) “the notation of the 
decision or the ruling on the calendar shall constitute the 
order and entry thereof” and thus creates a “final” order, that 
order would not become “appealable” until it satisfied HRAP Rule 
4(b)(3)’s requirement that an entry of judgment or order be 
filed with the clerk of the court.  Id. at 236, 74 P.3d at 988.   
  This court further stated in a footnote that “[i]t is 
common-sensical that an unsigned order is ineffective.  That 
being the case, the written order . . . did not become effective 
until . . . Judge Devens signed it.”  Id. at 232 n.7, 74 P.3d at 
984 n.7.  Therefore, pursuant to HRAP 4(b)(3), this court held 
that the orders in Bohannon became appealable on the date that 
the written orders were signed by the judge, and thus the appeal 
in that case was timely filed.26  See id. at 232, 232 n.7, 74 
                     
 25 HRPP Rule 44, Settlement of findings of fact, conclusions of law, 
and order; entry of order, subsection  (b)(1) provide d: 
(b) In the district court.  
(1) After the decision or ruling of the court 
following a hearing on a motion, the clerk shall note 
the decision or ruling on the calendar.   The notation 
of the decision or ruling on the calendar shall 
constitute the order and the entry thereof . . . .  
HRPP Rule 44(b)(1). 
 26 We note that our holding in Bohannon  addressed only the 
circumstances of that  case and should not be read to approve modifying a 
filed order by the subsequent addition of a judge or clerk’s signature.  As 
 
(continued .  . .) ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
26 P.3d at 984, 984 n.7.  Taken together, HRS §§ 641- 1(a) and 604-
20, the aforementioned court rules, and our holding in Bohannon 
provide that a signature of a clerk or judge as  to the text of 
an order is necessary to fulfill the requirements of an “entry 
of judgment or appealable order” under HRAP Rule 4(a).27 
2. The ICA Had Jurisdiction of the Appeal Un der the Circumstances 
of This Case 
  “The policy of this court has always been to permit 
litigants, where possible, to appeal and hear the case on its 
merits.”  State by Office of Consumer Prot. v. Joshua, 141 
Hawaii 91, 99, 405 P.3d 527,  535 (2017) (quoting Jones v. 
Dieker, 39 Haw. 208, 209 (Haw. Terr. 1952)).  Dismissals due to  
defects caused by the practices or procedure of trial courts 
require “litigants to bear unnecessary expense and delay in 
having their appeals addressed on the merits.”  Id. 
  In this case, the ICA held that it lacked jurisdiction 
to review the Order Denying Request for Costs because the order 
lacked a district court clerk or judge’s signature.  It appears, 
however, that the ICA did not consider other documents in the 
                                                                               
(. . . continued) 
 
discussed supra, adding a qualifying signature is a necessary step that is to 
be completed prior to the entry of an order or judgment.  
 27 The signature of the clerk or judge must pertain to the text of 
the order; the requirement is distinct from our court rules requiring a date 
and time stamp by a clerk at filing, which may also include a signature by 
the clerk responsible for filing the subject document.  See HRDC Rule 2(b) 
(2012).   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
27 record that support a finding that the district court 
effectively denied the 
Request for Costs.  The Denial of 
Proposed Judgment, similar to the 
Order Denying Request for 
Costs, was stamped “DENIED” and “FILED.”   Although t he Denial of 
Proposed Judgment did not include a signature on the signature 
line of the judgment, it was  accompanied in the record by a 
signed Denial Form.  The Denial Form specifically stated : “No 
judgment granted on Defendant’s Sept. 9, 20 14 Request for 
Taxation of Costs”  and was signed by a jud ge.  Black’s Law 
Dictionary defines “to grant”  as “to approve, warrant, or 
order.”  Black’s Law Dictionary  (10th ed. 2014).  Thus, “no 
judgment granted” may be read as  “no judgment approved,” meaning  
the district court did not approve--and therefore denied--the 
Request for Costs.  As such, t he signed Denial Form indicates 
that the judge denied the Request for Costs.   
  A s discussed above, HRS § 641- 1(a) permits appeals to 
be heard from final orders.  A final order is an order that 
“ends litigation by  fully deciding the rights and liability of 
all parties and leaves nothing further to be adjudicated.”   
Casumpang v. ILWU, Local 142, 91 Hawai i 425, 427, 984 P.2d 1251, 
1253 (1999).  Greenspon’s  Request for Costs was a separate 
matter from the ejectment action, which had already been 
dismissed.  See CRSC, Inc. v. Sage Diamond Co., 95 Hawai i 301, 
307, 22 P.3d 97, 103 (App. 2001) (holding that entry of judgment ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
28 on merits of case and taxation of costs are separate legal 
acts).  The denial of the Request for Costs left nothing to be 
decided regarding the taxation of costs.  Accordingly, 
construing the Order Denying Request for Costs with  the Denial 
of Proposed Judgment and its accompanying Denial Form, we find 
that there is appellate jurisdiction over the appeal  from the 
Order Denying Request for Costs.    
3. The District Court Abused its Discretion in Denying the 
Request for Costs Without Explanation 
  Because we find 
appellate  jurisdiction to review the 
Order Denying Request for Costs, we turn to the merits of 
Greenspon’s argument that the district court abused its 
discretion by denying the Request for Costs.  “A court abuses 
its discretion whenever it exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detrime nt of a party.”  Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. 
United Agri Prods. , 86 Hawai‘i 214, 241, 948 P.2d 1055, 1082 
(1997) (alteration omitted) (quoting Aloha Unlimited, Inc. v.  
Coughlin, 79 Hawai ‘i 527, 532– 33, 904 P.2d 541, 546 –47 
(App.1995)).   
  D CRCP Rule 54(d) pro vides that “costs shall be allowed 
as course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise 
directs.”  DCRCP Rule 54(d) ( 1996).  Although the award of costs 
is discretionary, the parallel provision in the HRCP has been ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
29 interpreted to create a strong presumption that costs will be 
awarded and to also require a court  denying costs to explain why 
an award of costs would be inequitable “unless the circumstances 
justifying the denial of costs are plain from the record.”  Wong 
v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998)  
(brackets omitted) (discussing HRCP Rule 54(d)).  
  
On the Denial Form accompanying the Denial of Proposed 
Judgment, the district court ’s explanation stated, “This 
document is denied for the following reasons  . . . No judgment 
granted on Defendant’s Sept. 9, 2014 Request for Taxation of 
Costs.”  This statement does not provide an explanation of  why 
it would be inequitable to grant the taxation of costs as would 
generally be required to  justify the denial of Greenspon’s 
request.  See Wong , 88 Hawai i at 52, 961 P.2d at 617.  
  Further, “the circumstances justifying the denial of 
costs are” not “plain from the record.”  Id.  To the contrary, 
the evidence in the record appears to support a finding that 
Greenspon was entitled to costs: Greenspon was the prevailing 
party on the Motion to Dismiss; the district court stated that 
it would consider Greenspon’s motion for taxation of costs in 
2011 at a hearing o n Greenspon’s Motion to Dismiss;  and 
Greenspon filed his R equest for of Costs as the prevailing party ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
30 in September 2014.28  By not setting forth reasons for its 
denial, the district court disregarded principles of law 
requiring a reasoned explanation for a denial of costs when 
justifying circumstances are not clear from the record.  See 
Wong, 88 Hawai‘ i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998).  The denial of 
the taxation of costs caused a substantial detriment to 
Greenspon, requiring him to bear his full costs of litigation in 
the district court.   Therefore, the district court abused its 
discretion by denying Greenspon’s Request for C osts without 
stating any reasons why it would be inequitable to grant the 
request.  See State v. Davia , 87 Hawaiʻi 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 
1351 (1998).   
V. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, this court affirms t he ICA’s 
judgment on appeal except to the extent that the ICA concluded 
that it lacked appellate jurisdiction to review the O rder 
Denying Request for Costs filed on September 22, 2014.  
Accordingly, we vacate the portion of the ICA judgment on appeal 
holding that it lacked appellate jurisdiction to review the 
Order Denying Request for Costs , vacate the district court’s 
Order Denying Request for Costs, and remand the case 
to the 
                     
 28 Greenspon provided detailed invoices from his former counsel and 
copies of the checks to his former counsel with his reply to Deutsche Bank’s 
opposition to his request.   ***FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER*** 
31 district court for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.   
Michael C. Greenspon  
pro se 
 
J. Blaine Rogers  
Jenny J.N.A. N akamoto 
for respondent/plaintiff -
appellee  
 /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald  
/s/ Paula A. Nakayama  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Richard W. Pollack  
/s/ Michael D. Wilson  
 
