***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
 
---o0o--- 
________________________________________________________________  
 
STATE OF HAWAI ʻI,  
Respondent/Plaintiff- Appellee,  
 
vs. 
 
ALLAN MICHAEL G. FELICIANO, 
aka ALLAN M. GAMON FELICIANO, 
Petitioner/Defendant- Appellant . 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
SCWC-17-0000581 
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
(CAAP-17-0000581; CASE NO. 3FFC- 17-0000029)  
 
JUNE 29, 2021 
 
RECKTENWALD, C.J., NAKAYAMA, McKENNA, WILSON, AND EDDINS, JJ.  
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J. 
 
I. Introduction  
 Michael G. Feliciano  (“Feliciano”)  appeals his jury 
conviction in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (“family 
court”) for abuse of family or household member .  Feliciano Electronically Filed
Supreme Court
SCWC-17-0000581
29-JUN-2021
01:31 PM
Dkt. 12 OP***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
2 
 allegedl y struck the complaining witness (the “CW”), his wife, 
in the face  in the early morning hours of January 14, 2017 . 
 Before trial, the State of Hawaiʻi (“the State”) filed a 
notice of intent to use evidence of Feliciano’s “prior bad 
acts,” seeking to introd uce a 2016 incident in which Feliciano  
allegedly  pushed the CW out of a chair (“chair incident”).  The 
State asserted the chair incident was relevant because : (1) it 
contributed to the CW’s medical use of marijuana; (2) Feliciano  
indicated his intent  to raise CW’s marijuana use the night of 
January 13, 2017; (3) it explained the CW’s medical marijuana 
use; and (4) it would rebut Feliciano’s expected defenses .  The 
family court ruled the State could introduce the chair incident  
“[i]f the door is opened ” by Feliciano through evidence of  the 
CW’s marijuana use.    
During direct examination , the CW testified she used 
medical marijuana to treat her chronic back pain .  On cross-
examination, defense counsel asked about her marijuana use and 
the couple’s prior six -month separation, but did not ask why the 
couple had separated.  Feliciano later testified that the 
couple’s  relationship began to deteriorate after the CW “ started 
going heavy on marijuana usage” and that the CW voluntarily left 
their home in February 2016 .  During his  cross-examination, the 
family court overruled defense counsel’s objection  to the State ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
3 
 asking Feliciano about the chair incident,  ruling that Feliciano  
had “[o]pened the door.”  
The family cou rt then allowed the CW to testify as a 
rebuttal witness regarding the chair incident because the 
“defendant testified on the relationship between the parties by 
saying she used drugs or marijuana and that -– well, the 
relationship was raised and the inference also was left that she 
moved out for different reasons. ”  The family court gave 
limiting instruct ions to the jury  that the chair incident could 
only be considered as to the relationship between Feliciano and 
the CW as well as  to Felicano ’s motive. 
 On appeal to the I ntermediate Court of Appeals (“ICA”) , 
Feliciano argued the family court abused its discretion in 
admitting the chair incident evidence and that the family 
court’s limiting  instruction s did not mitigate  the prejudicial  
effect of the evidence .   
 In its August 31, 2020 memorandum opinion, the ICA majority  
rejected Feliciano’s arguments.   State v. Feliciano , CAAP-17-
0000581, 2020 WL 5111230 (App. Aug. 31, 2020) (mem.).   The ICA 
majority  ruled: (1) the family court properly admitted the chair 
incident evidence under the “opening the door”  doctrine because 
Feliciano offered evidence that could be false or misleading  in 
isolation;  (2) the chair incident evidence passed muster under  
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence (“HRE”)  Rules 404(b) and 403  (1980); ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
4 
 and (3) the family court’s limiting instructions mitigated any 
unfair prejudice resulting from the chair incident  evidence .  
Judge Leonard dissented.   
 We hold the ICA erred by ruling Feliciano “op ened the door” 
to the chair incident  evidence .  We have not adopted the 
“opening the door ” doctrine and, in any event, Feliciano did not 
first introduce inadmissible evidence  or evidence that was false 
or misleading in isolation .  We also hold the  ICA erre d by 
ruling the chair incident evidence admissible under HRE Rule 
404(b).  Moreover, even if the chair incident evidence had 
otherwise been admissible, it should have excluded by HRE Rule 
403.  We further hold the family court ’s limiting instructions 
failed to mitigate the prejudicial impact of the chair incident  
evidence .  Finally, we hold that the improper admission of the 
chair incident evidence was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
 Hence, we vacate the ICA’s  September 28, 2020  judgment on 
appeal and the family court’s June 2, 2017 judgment, and we 
remand this case  to the family court for further proceedings 
consistent with this opinion .   
 
 
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
5 
 II. Background  
A. Factual background  
 Feliciano and the CW were married around 2012 ,1 and owned a 
house to gether in Kona, Hawaiʻi.  Feliciano worked as a porter 
and bartender.  He was also an ammo specialist  and sergeant  in 
the Hawaiʻi Army National Guard, which he had entered 
approximately eleven years  earlier.  Feliciano is five feet six 
inches tall and weig hs 170 pounds, and the CW is five feet tall 
and weighs 105 pounds.   
B. Procedural background  
 1. Family court proceedings  
  a. Pre-trial 
 On February 2, 2017, the State charged Feliciano via 
complaint with abuse of a family or household member, in 
violation of Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (“HRS”) § 709 -906(1) (Supp. 
2016) of the CW “ [o]n or about the 13 th day of January, 2017 [.]”2  
                                                           
1  The CW testified she was in the process of filing for a divorce.   
 
2  HRS § 709 -906(1) provides in relevant part:  
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for a ny person, singly or in 
concert, to physically abuse a family or household member . 
. . .  
 
For the purposes of this section:  
 
 . . . .  
 
“Family or household member”:  
 
(a) Means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, 
former spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries,  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
6 
 Feliciano  indicated his defenses would be a lack of the 
requisite state of mind and self -defense.   
 Before trial , the State filed a notice o f intent to use 
evidence of Feliciano’s “prior bad act” at trial , specifically 
of “[f]acts and [c]ircumstances documented in police report 
C17001634 and in interviews with [the CW] detailing an incident 
in 2016 in which [Feliciano] pushed [the CW] out of a  chair.”  
The State indicated its  intent to introduce this evidence 
“pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence Ru le 404 to show state of 
mind (victim; witnesses; and Defendant) motive, intent, plan, 
absence of mistake, knowledge, modus operandi, and/or other R.  
404 purposes.”  The State  argued: (1) the chair incident 
contributed to the CW’s medical marijuana use; (2) Feliciano had 
indicated his intent to raise the issue of the CW’s marijuana 
use on the night of January 13, 2017; (3) the chair incident was 
necessary to explain the CW’s medical marijuana use ; and (4) the 
chair incident  was also relevant to rebut Feliciano’s expected 
defenses of ignorance or mistake as well as  self-defense 
regarding  the initial aggressor  issue.  Feliciano opposed and 
also filed a mo tion in limine to exclude any such evidence.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
persons in a dating relationship as defined 
under section 586 -1, persons who have a 
child in common, parents, children, persons 
related by consanguinity, and persons 
jointly residing or formerly residing in 
the same dwelling unit[.]  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
7 
 The family court3 ruled the chair incident  would be admitted 
if Feliciano “opened the door ,” stating: 
[Deputy prosecuting attorney (“DPA”)]:  —- far as the prior 
bad acts, the State is just trying to reserve it s ability 
to bring up a prior incident between the defendant and the 
complainant  with regard —- 
 
. . . . 
 
THE COURT:  . . . . 
 So you talking about prior actions of the defendant 
may be relevant?  
 
[DPA]:  If that —- 
 
THE COURT:  If the – 
 
[DPA]:  —- her marijuana usage is brought up.  
 
THE COURT:  If the door is opened.  
 
[DPA]:  Yes.  
 
THE COURT:  So well to that extent, if the motion in limine 
is prohibiting that, motion is denied.  
 
Trial then began.  
  b. Jury trial  
   i. Feliciano’s o pening statement  
 During Feliciano’s opening statement, the deputy public 
defender (“D PD”) described the CW as  being “under the influence 
of various substances”  and “behaving aggressively”  on January 
13, 2017, Feliciano’s actions as “justified,” and the couple’s 
relationship as “rocky.”   
 
 
                                                           
3  The Honorable Ronal d Ibarra presided.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
8 
    ii. The CW’s testimony  
 The State called the CW as its first witness , who testified 
as follows.  
 On the evening of January 13, 2017, the CW and Feliciano 
had a get-together  with friends at their home.  Feliciano was 
“drinking the whole tim e”; the CW did not know how much alcohol 
Feliciano consumed .  The CW did not drink alcohol that evening, 
but she used marijuana .  She had a valid medical marijuana 
license for chronic back pain.   
 At some point during the evening, “some roughhousing” brok e 
out between two of the  male guests and Feliciano became 
involved .  The CW intervened to calm Feliciano down  to keep him 
from fighting .  Feliciano  told her to “get out of his way [,]” 
while grabbing and twist ing her wrists.  She then went inside 
the house,  turned off the lights, pulled out the pull -out couch  
bed in the living room , and fell asleep alone with her clothes 
on.   
 In the early morning hours of January 14, 2017,  Feliciano 
pulled the CW off of the couch bed .  She saw one of  Feliciano’s  
friends al so sleeping on the couch bed with his clothes on.   
Feliciano told her to “get [her] ass out of bed ” and asked “what 
the heck was [she] doing sleeping with his friend .”  She 
responded that “[she] didn’t wanna go and sleep in the room with 
him, in the same b ed, and [she] told him to take his friend with ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
9 
 him ‘cause [she] was sleeping on the couch first.”  Feliciano, 
who appeared to be under the influence of alcohol, “got mad at 
[her].”  He said , “Oh, why you don’t wanna come sleep in the 
room with me, ‘cause I  hurt you?  You don’t know what hurting 
is.  You don’t know what abuse is.  I’ll show you.”   
 Feliciano then punched the left side of the CW’s face with 
his right fist.  She had her arms down at her side when  
Feliciano struck her;  she blacked out and fell  to the ground .4  
When she came to, she was  lying on the ground and  Feliciano was  
angrily standing over her.  The CW went into the bathroom and 
took pictures of her face, and when she went back  to the living 
room, the friend was gone.  She did not call the  police and went 
back to sleep.   
The next morning, the CW went to get a massage.  Feliciano 
texted, asking if he had hit her the night before, stating that 
if he had, he was sorry .5  She did not respond .  Approximately 
four days after Feliciano struck her , the CW went to the police 
                                                           
4  The complaint alleged the abuse occurred “ [o]n or about  the 13th day of  
January, 2017[.]”  Although evidence was elicited that Feliciano grabbed and 
twisted the CW’s  wrists that night, the State appeared to elect the punch 
that allege dly occurred the morning of January 14, 2017 , as the abuse 
incident; in any event, the jury was given an unanimity instruction.   See 
State v. Hironaka , 99 Hawaiʻi 198, 207 -08, 53 P.3d 806 , 815-16 (2002 ) (an 
unanimity instruction is required, absent an elec tion by the prosecution, 
when at trial, the prosecution adduce s proof of two or more separate and 
distinct culpable acts and the prosecution seeks to submit to the jury that 
only one offense was committed ). 
 
5  A screenshot of the text messages was receive d into evidence.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
10 
 station,  where she had three photographs of her face taken.6  She 
then went to the family court to obtain a temporary restraining 
order (“TRO”).7  
 On cross -examination, the DPD asked the CW about her 
marijuana use, medical mari juana card, and the other prescribed 
medications she took the night of January 13, 2017.8  The DPD 
also asked about the couple’s prior separation , and the CW 
responded she had been separated from Feliciano for six months.   
The DPD did not ask why the coupl e had separated.  
   iii. Feliciano’s testimony  
 Feliciano  disputed the CW’s account of events,  testifying 
as follows.  
 After the g et-together , Feliciano fell asleep in the master 
bedroom and when he woke up, the CW was not in bed with him.   
Worried, Felici ano looked for her  and found her in the living 
room on the couch bed “under the covers ” with one of his 
friends.   He woke the CW and pulled her up to go back to the 
                                                           
6  The photographs, which showed a laceration and slight discoloration on 
the left side of the CW’s face, were admitted into evidence.   
 
7  The CW testified regarding the January 30, 2017 TRO hearing, and the 
family court received into evidence a video disc that recorded the TRO 
hearing; the TRO hearing was played for the jury.  According to the CW, 
Feliciano testified at the TRO hearing that he pulled the CW out of the bed 
and that he open -hand slapped the CW .   
 
8  The CW testified she  took Trazodone, which was supposed to help her 
sleep, and Clonazepam, which was supposed to help with her night terrors.  
The CW also stated she was prescribed Progesterone for anxiety and Cymbalta 
for depression; although she stated she always took her m edication as 
prescribed, it is unclear from the record whether she was also on 
Progesterone and Cymbalta on the night of January 13, 2017.   ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
11 
 bedroom.  As they were walking to the bedroom, she pulled her 
hand away from his, became an gry, started yelling, and kept 
pushing him ; Feliciano reacted by slapping the CW’s face.  He 
then walked into his room, and he did not see the CW again that 
night.  Feliciano denied telling the CW , “You don’t know what 
abuse is, I’ll show you what abuse is .”   
 Feliciano then testified  regarding the effect of the CW 
“going heavy on marijuana usage” on thei r relationship : the CW 
stopped going to work , watched television  while “smoking all 
day[,]” and Feliciano had to do the chores after working all 
day.  The CW was on a number of medications, including 
marijuana .  Their relationship was “rocky”  and although the CW 
wanted to separate, he did not want to as he felt they could 
work things out.   
 On cross -examination, t he State asked Feliciano , “Did [the 
CW] move out because of something you had done to her in 
February of last year?”  Defense counsel objected ; the family 
court overruled the objection, stating, “Opened the door.”  The 
State then asked, “Did you push her out of a chair in February 
because you were upset about something to eat?” to which 
Feliciano responded he had not.   
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
12 
 iv. The CW’s chair incident testimony  and the 
family court’s  limiting instructions  
 
 After the defense rested and the jury left the courtroom, 
the State stated it would call the CW  as a rebuttal witness .  
After a discussion with counsel , the family court indicated  it 
would instruct the jury that the chair incident evidence could 
be considered only on “the issue of the relationship of the 
parties” and for no other reason.   
  After the jury returned to the courtroom, the family court 
held a bench conference , stating : 
THE COURT:  This is a bench conference on the record.   
The reason the court is giving this instruction and 
to allow the rebuttal question is because the defendant 
testified on the relationship between the parties by saying 
she used drugs or marijuana and that -- well, the 
relationship was raised and that the inference also was 
left that she moved out for different reasons.  That was 
the inference.  And the court has also looked at the 403 
balancing factor, prejudicial versus probative, and finds 
this is more probative than prejudicial.  
 
 The family court then instructed the jury as follows:  
THE COURT:  . . . . 
 So, Ladies and Gentlemen, you are about to hear 
evidence that  the defendant at another time may have 
committed other wrongs.  This evidence, if believed by you, 
may be considered only on the issue of the relationship of 
the parties.  You must not -- do not consider this evidence 
for any other reason.  You must not u se this evidence to 
conclude that because the defendant at another time may 
have committed other wrongs that he is a person of bad 
character and, therefore, must have committed the offense 
charged in this case.  
 
 The State then called the CW as a rebuttal witness:  
Q.  Ma’am, on January 13th, 2017, did you push the 
defendant before he hit you in the face?  
 
A.  No, I did not.  
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
13 
 Q.  In -- when you moved out in 2016, did you move out 
because he pushed you out of a chair in February of 2016?  
 
A.  Yes, yes.  
 
 After the parties rested, during its instructions to the 
jury, the family court instructed the jury in relevant part : 
[THE COURT:]  Several times during the trial I’ve told you 
that certain evidence was allowed in this trial for a 
particular and limited pur pose.  When you consider that 
evidence, you must limit your consideration to that 
purpose.  
 
 . . . . 
 
You have heard evidence that the defendant at another time 
may have engaged in other acts.   This evidence, if believed 
by you, may be considered only on t he issue of defendant’s 
motive to commit the offense charged.  Do not consider this 
evidence for any other reason.  You must not use this 
evidence to conclude that because the defendant at other 
times may have engaged in other acts that he is a person of 
bad character and, therefore, must have committed the 
offense charged in this case.  In considering the evidence 
for the limited purpose for which it has been received, you 
must weigh it in the same manner as you would all other 
evidence in this case and co nsider it along with all other 
evidence in this case.  
 
  v. Sentence and appeal  
 On June 2, 2017, the jury convicted Feliciano of the 
charged offense.   The family court sentenced Feliciano to 
probation for two years with conditions and entered its judgment  
that same day.    
 2. ICA proceedings  
 On appeal to the ICA, Feliciano argued  (1) the family court 
abused its discretion when it allowed the State to cross -examine 
Feliciano about the chair incident and allowed the State to call 
the CW to rebut Feliciano’s  testimony denying the chair ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
14 
 incident;  (2) the chair incident evidence should have been 
excluded under HRE Rule 404(b) ;9 and (3) the limiting  
instruction s did not mitigate  the prejudic e from the chair 
incident  evidence .  Feliciano also argued that the natu re of the 
marital relationship, and the reasons why the CW moved out of 
the house, were only “slightly relevant, ” if at all, to either 
party’s theory of the case.   
 The State responded: (1) Feliciano “opened the door ” to the 
chair incident evidence by testifying on direct examination  
about th e alleged deterioration of the marriage due to the CW’s 
marijuana use ; and (2)  the chair incident evidence independently 
passed muster under HRE Rule 404(b ).  The State  also argued “the 
entire defense was to portray [the CW] as an unfaithful and 
intoxicated person of bad character[.]”   The State contended 
“[d]efense counsel’s presentation at trial suggested the 
evidence of [the CW’s] use of marijuana was very relevant[,]” 
and that Feliciano adduced evidence  of the CW’s marijuana use  to 
attack her character and credibility.   
                                                           
9  HRE Rule 404(b) provides in relevant part:  
 
Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.   Evidence of other crimes, 
wrongs, or  acts is not admissible to prove the character of 
a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.   
It may, however, be admissible where such evidence is 
probative of another fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action, such as proof of motive, 
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, 
identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake or 
accident.  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
15 
  The ICA majority affirmed.  Feliciano , mem. op. at 2.  It 
ruled the family court did not abuse its discretion by allowing 
the State to (1) cross -examine Feliciano about the chair 
incident, then (2) call the CW to rebut Feliciano’s testimony.  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 21.  Specifically, the ICA  majority  
concluded : (1) Feliciano “opened the door” to the chair incident 
evidence because Feliciano’s testimony “created at least the 
strong impression that the  CW’s marijuana usage had led to the 
deterioration of the couple’s relationship and their temporary 
separation” and the State was entitled to counter that 
impression ; (2) the chair incident evidence independently passed 
muster under HRE Rule 404(b); and (3 ) the limiting instructions 
mitigated any unfair prejudice.   Feliciano , mem. op. at 13 -21. 
 Judge Leonard dissented (“the  ICA dissent”).  Feliciano , 
mem. op. at 22  (Leonard, J., dissenting) .   
 3. Certiorari application  
 On certiorari, Feliciano presents t he following question: 
“Whether the ICA gravely erred when it concluded that ‘the 
Family Court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the State 
(1) to cross -examine Feliciano about the chair incident, and (2) 
to call his wife, to rebut Feliciano’s testim ony about the chair 
incident.’”  
 
 ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
16 
 III. Standards of review  
A. Evidentiary rulings  
 “The appellate court applies ‘two different standards of 
review in addressing evidentiary issues.  Evidentiary rulings 
are reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless applicat ion of the 
rule admits of only one correct result, in which case review is 
under the right/wrong standard.’”  State v. Acker , 133 Hawaiʻi 
253, 274, 327 P.3d 931, 952 (2014) . 
B. Admissibility of prior bad acts  
 “[A] trial court’s balancing of the probative value 
of prior bad act evidence against the prejudicial effect of 
such evidence under HRE Rule 403 (1993) is reviewed for 
abuse of disc retion.”  State v. Cordeiro , 99 Hawaiʻi 390, 
404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002) (quoting State v. Torres , 85 
Hawaiʻi 417, 421, 945 P.2d 849, 853 (App. 1997)).  When such 
an abuse of discretion is identified, it is grounds to 
vacate a conviction unless it is harm less beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  State v. Kazanas , 138 Hawaiʻi 23, 43, 375 
P.3d 1261, 1281 (2016).  
 
State v. Gallagher , 146 Hawaiʻi 462, 470, 463 P.3d 1119, 1127 
(2020) (alteration in original).  
C. Jury instructions  
 When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at 
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading.  Erroneous instructions are presumptively 
harmful and are  a ground for reversal unless it 
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the 
error was not prejudicial.  However, error is not to be 
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.  
It must be examined in the light of the entire pr oceedings 
and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be 
entitled.  In that context, the real question becomes 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might 
have contributed to conviction.  If there is such a 
reasonable possibility  in a criminal case, then the error 
is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
17 
 of conviction on which it may have been based must be set 
aside. 
 
State v. Nichols , 111 Hawaiʻi 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(cleaned up).  
IV. Discussion  
A. The family court erred in  ruling Feliciano “opened the 
 door” to the chair incident  
 
 Feliciano argues the ICA erred in concluding he “opened the 
door” to  the chair incident  evidence .   
 “This court has stated that the ‘opening the door’ doctrine 
is essentially a rule of expanded relevancy.”  State v. Miranda , 
147 Hawaiʻi 171, 183, 465 P.3d 618, 630 (2020) (citing State v. 
Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi 409, 422, 453 P.3d 229, 242 (2019)).  Under 
the general formulation of th is doctrine, “when one party  
presents inadmissible  evidence to the jury, the opposing party 
is permitted to adduce pertinent evidence that would otherwise 
be inadmissible in order to rebut the improperly introduced 
evidence.”  Id. (citing Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 422, 453 P.3d at 
242).  “ The extent of this doctrine is limited, and it does not 
allow a party to adduce inadmissible evidence for the purpose of 
rebutting inferences raised by the introduction of admissible 
evidence .”  Id. (citing Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 422-23, 453 P.3d 
at 242-43).  
 This court  has not yet adopted the “opening the door” 
doctrine .  See State v. Salavea , 147 Hawaiʻi 564, 577, 465 P.3d ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
18 
 1011, 1024 (2020 ).  In this case, the “opening the door ” 
doctrine would in any event not have allowed admission of the 
chair incident  evidence  because Feliciano’s testimony  regarding 
the CW’s marijuana use  was admissible .  See State v. Calara , 132 
Hawaiʻi 391, 402, 322 P.3d 931, 942 (2014) (“[A] defendant is 
entitled to cross -examine a witness concerning t he witness’s 
drug use and addiction at or near the time of the incident to 
the extent that it affected the witness’s perception or 
recollection of the alleged event[.]” (cleaned up) ).  Thus, 
under the doctrine’s general formulation, Feliciano’s testimony 
regarding the CW’s marijuana use was admissible and not properly 
countered by the chair incident evidence .   
As noted by Judge Leonard in her dissent , however, the 
State does not even argue on appeal that Feliciano  introduced 
inadmissible evidence and th erefore opened the door to the 
State’s introduction of inadmissible evidence.   Feliciano , mem. 
op. at 24 (Leonard, J., dissenting).   Instead, the ICA majority  
adopted the State ’s argument that Feliciano  offered evidence 
that could be shown to be false or misl eading in isolation , as 
Feliciano’s testimony  “created at least the strong impression 
that the CW’s marijuana usage had led to the deterioration of 
the couple’s relationship and their temporary separation.”  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 13 -14.  The ICA majority  cited to Lavoie, 
which recognized “authority from other jurisdictions for the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
19 
 proposition that the door may also be opened to inadmissible 
evidence when a party offers admissible evidence that is false 
or misleading if considered in isolation .”  Feliciano , mem. op. 
at 12 (quoting Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 424, 453 P.3d at 244 ).10   
The ICA majority  concluded the chair incident  evidence  
admissible under th is iteration of the doctrine “to place 
Feliciano’s testimony in its proper context and to correct the 
allegedly false impression created by that testi mony.”  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 14.  According to t he ICA majority , 
Feliciano presented evidence “false or misleading if considered 
in isolation ” that portrayed the CW “as an unfaithful, drug -
abusing spouse who was responsible for the couple’s prior 
separation, as well as for Feliciano’s conduct on the night he 
struck her.”  Feliciano , mem. op. at 13.  It opined the chair 
incident evidence challenged Feliciano’s account of the reason 
for the couple’s separation; this evidence in turn “shed light 
on the purpo rtedly true nature of the couple’s relationship.”  
Id.  
But as Judge Leonard noted in her dissent, this court  may 
have implicitly rejected this alternative formulation of the 
“opening the door ” doctrine.  See Feliciano , mem. op. at 24 n.1 
                                                           
10  This court concluded that “such a rule would not apply here even if 
this court were to adopt it because no aspect of [the wi tness’s] testimony 
was shown to be false or misleading.”  Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 424, 453 P.3d at 
244. ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
20 
 (Leonard, J., dis senting) .11  We need not deci de whether we have 
done so, however, as application of this formulation of the 
doctrine is limited “to situations in which the originally 
submitted evidence creates ‘significant prejudice. ’”  State v. 
Fukusaku , 85 Hawaiʻi 462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997).  
Feliciano ’s testimony did not create “significant prejudice.”   
Whether Feliciano and the CW ’s marriage was “rocky” and, if so, 
whether the CW ’s marijuana use contributed to the decline of 
their marriage was barely rele vant, if at all,  to whether 
Feliciano had committed abuse in the early morning hours of 
January 14, 2017.   Any alleged lack of fidelity was also 
unrelated to the elements of the offense.   
All in all, t he ICA majority  erred in concluding the chair 
incident  evidence was admissible under the “opening the door ” 
doctrine.   An “expanded rule of relevancy ” cannot become a 
vehicle for admitting otherwise clearly inadmissible and 
                                                           
11  In State v. Fukusaku , we stated:  
We also disagree with the Prosecution ’s contention 
that defense counsel “opened the door” to admission of the 
[luminol and phenolphthalein ] test results.   Although the 
Prosecution cites no authority, its argument appears to be 
based on the doctrine of “curative admissibility,” also 
known as “opening the door” or “fighting fire with fire.”   
Under this doctrine, when one p arty introduces inadmissible 
evidence, the opposing party may respond by introducing 
[their] own inadmissible evidence on the same issue.   We 
note that this doctrine is subject to abuse and that most 
jurisdictions have limited its use to situations in whic h 
the originally submitted evidence creates significant 
prejudice.   
 
85 Hawaiʻi 462, 497, 946 P.2d 32, 67 (1997) (cleaned up ). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
21 
 prejudicial evidence.   As the “opening the door” doctrine is 
inapplicable, the admissi bility of the chair incident  evidence  
must be evaluated on its own merit.   See Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 
425, 453 P.3d at 245.   The ICA majority also erred in this 
regard. 
B. The chair incident  evidence  was not admissible under HRE 
Rule 404(b)  
 
1. General pr inciples regarding the admission of evidence 
under HRE Rule 404(b)  
 
 Feliciano also argues the ICA  majority  erred by concluding 
the chair incident evidence independently passe s muster under 
HRE Rule 404(b).  HRE Rule 404(b) provides  in relevant part : 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts .  Evidence of other 
crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the 
character of a person in order to show action in conformity 
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such 
evidence is probative of another fact  that is of 
consequence to the determination of the action, such as 
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, 
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake 
or accident.   
 
“The list of permissible purposes in Rule 404(b) is not intended 
to be exhaustive ‘for the range of relevancy outside the ban is 
almost indefinite.’”  State v. Behrendt , 124 Hawaiʻi 90, 103, 237 
P.3d 1156, 1169 (2010).  
Rule 404(b) was intended not to define the set of 
permissible purposes for which bad -acts evidence may be 
admitted but rather to define the one impermissible  purpose 
for such evidence: a person who commits a crime pr obably 
has a defect of character; a person with a defect of 
character is more likely than people generally to have 
committed the act in question.  
 
Id. (cleaned up ). ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
22 
  “When evidence is offered for substantive reasons rather 
than propensity, a trial court mu st additionally weigh the 
potential prejudicial effects of the evidence against its 
probative value under HRE Rule 403.”  Id.  HRE Rule 403 provides 
that relevant evidence12 “may be excluded if its probative value 
is substantially outweighed by the danger o f unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.”  
 Thus, this court must determine (1) if the chair incident 
evidence was probative of any fact of consequence other than 
character and propensity; and , if so, (2) whether the probative 
value of the evidence was substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice to Feliciano.  
2. The chair incident evidence was inadmissible under HRE 
Rule 404(b)  
 
 In its limiting instruction to the jury, the family court 
instructed the jury it was to consider the chair incident 
evidence “on the issue of the relationship of the parties” to 
purportedly provide context about Feliciano and the CW ’s 
relationship and “that the inference also  was left that [the CW] 
moved out for different reasons.”   In its closing instructions 
                                                           
12  “Relevant evidence” is defined broadly as “evidence having any tendency 
to make the existence of any fact that is of consequen ce to the determination 
of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the 
evidence.”  HRE Rule 401.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
23 
 to the jury, the family court then indicated it had admi tted 
Feliciano’s prior bad act to be considered by the jury “only on 
the issue of defendant’s motive to commit the offense charged .” 
This court has upheld the admissibility of prior instances 
of domestic abuse to prove particular issues that arise in 
domestic abuse cases.  In State v. Clark, this court affirmed 
the defendant’s conviction for the attempted second degree 
murder of his wife.  83 Hawaiʻi 289, 307, 926 P.2d  194, 212 
(1996).  During the jury trial, the wife recanted the charge, 
although she had admitted to having told a detective and others 
that the defendant  had stabbed her.  83 Hawaiʻi at 292-93, 926 
P.2d at 197 -98.  The wife stated tha t her original story was “a 
total lie[,]” thereby completely exculpating the  defendant .  83 
Hawaiʻi at 293, 926 P.2d at 198.  The State introduced into 
evidence the wife’s original statements to impeach her 
recantation, and the State was allowed to questio n the wife 
regarding two police investigations of abuse between herself and 
the defendant, during both of which the wife initially 
exculpated the defendant, but later stated he was violent.  Id. 
 This court concluded the trial court properly admitted 
evidence of the two police investigations.  83 Hawaiʻi at 302, 
926 P.2d at 207.  With respect to relevance, t his court held:  
[W]e hold that, where a victim recants allegations of 
abuse, evidence of prior incidents of violence between the 
victim and the defendant are relevant to show the trier of ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
24 
 fact the co ntext of the relationship between the victim and 
the defendant, where, as here, that relationship is offered 
as a possible explanation for the victim ’s recantation.  
 
Id.13   
 Clark, however,  is clearly distinguishable.   Clark was 
limited to admitting prior incidents of domestic violence to 
show the context of the relationship between the defendant and 
the victim  to explain the  victim’s  recantation .  Unlike Clark, 
the context of the relationship between the CW and Feliciano  was 
not offered as a possible expla nation for the victim’s 
recantation , “a central fact of consequence .”  In this case , the 
CW’s reason for  moving out of their home  eleven months before 
the alleged incident underlying the abuse charge  was not a 
“central fact of consequence ” as to whether Fe liciano committed 
the charged offense.  The chair incident evidence was not 
admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show the context of the 
relationship between Feliciano and the CW.   
The ICA majority  also opined, however,  that the full 
context of Feliciano an d the CW’s  relationship bore on 
Feliciano’s self -defense justification.  Feliciano was charged 
with intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causing physical 
                                                           
13  We also held the probative value of the prior acts outweighed prejudice 
where the relationship between the defendant and the w ife was offered to 
explain a central fact of consequence –- the wife’s recantation.  83 Hawaiʻi 
at 303, 926 P.2d at 208; see also  State v. Asuncion , 110 Hawaiʻi 154, 165 -66, 
129 P.3d 1182, 1193 -94 (App. 2006) (concluding evidence of prior acts of 
domestic violence was admissible where defendant’s girlfriend recanted a 
portion of the statement she gave to police regarding abuse by the 
defendant).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
25 
 abuse of a family or household member in violation of         
HRS § 709 -906(1).14  Feliciano ’s asserted self-defense 
justification placed his state of mind in dispute .15  The ICA 
majority ruled the context of the couple’s relationship, 
including Feliciano’s alleged prior abuse of the CW, probative 
of whether he reasonably believed that striking the CW was  
immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself 
against the CW’s alleged use of unlawful force against him.  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 15.    
We have difficulty understanding the logic of how a 
defendant ’s prior acts of domestic abuse against a complaining 
witness would be so probative; it appears that the ICA  
majority ’s reasoning  would effectively vitiate HRE Rule 404(b) ’s 
general preclusion  of a defendant ’s prior bad acts in domestic 
violence cases.   Admission of the chair incident evidence on 
these grounds would show  propensity towards physical abus e, the 
very inference HRE Rule 404(b) prohibits .  Thus, the chair 
                                                           
14  Because HRS § 709 -906 does not specify the state of mind required,   
HRS § 702 -204 (2014) provides the default  state of mind.  HRS § 702 -204 
states in relevant part: “When the state of mind required to establish an 
element of an offense is not specified by the law, that element is 
established if, with respect thereto, a person acts intentionally, knowingly, 
or recklessly.”   
 
15  See HRS 703-304 (2014) (“the use of force upon or toward another person 
is justifiable when the actor believes that such force is immediately 
necessary for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of unlawful 
force by the other per son on the present occasion.”); see also  State v. 
Arakawa, 101 Hawaiʻi 26, 32-33, 61 P.3d 537, 543 -44 (App. 2002) (“Defense 
counsel claimed Arakawa was justified in that he acted in self -defense, 
thereby putting in dispute what Arakawa’s state of mind was at the time he 
struck Carmichael.” (cleaned up)).  ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
26 
 incident evidence was not admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) on 
these grounds to rebut Feliciano’s self -defense justification.16   
C. The chair incident evidence should have been excluded by 
HRE Rule 403  
 
Even if the chair incident evidence had been  admissible  
under the “opening the door” expanded relevancy doctrine or 
under HRE Rule 404(b), it should in any event have been 
precluded  under HRE Rule 403.  Under HRE Rule 403, relevant 
                                                           
16  The chair incident evidence was also not admissible under HRE Rule 
404(b) for the other bases stated by the ICA  majority . 
 
The ICA majority also concluded that the chair incident evidence was 
admissible to test Feliciano’s credibility after he testified that the CW’s 
marijuana use led to the couple’s previous separation  eleven months earlier .  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 14 -15. It also ruled the CW’s rebuttal testimony 
admissible to impeach Feliciano’s credibi lity on the grounds he had denied 
the CW had moved out because of the chair incident.  Feliciano , mem. op. at 
15.  
 
HRE Rule 404(b) also provides that evidence of a witness’s character is 
admissible as provided in HRE Rule 608.  HRE Rule 608(b) (1993) stat es in 
relevant part: “(b) Specific instances of conduct.  Specific instances of a 
witness, for the purpose of attacking the witness’ credibility, if probative 
of untruthfulness, may be inquired into on cross -examination of the witness 
and, in the discretio n of the court, may be proved by extrinsic evidence.”  
The commentary to HRE Rule 608 states that subsection (b) “allows cross -
examination of the witness relative to specific collateral conduct to the 
extent that such conduct is relevant to veracity.  Such  conduct may not be 
independently proved even if the witness expressly denies it.”   
 
Feliciano , however,  did not testify that the CW moved out due to her 
marijuana use or deny that the CW moved out because of the chair incident; 
rather, he maintained he d id not know why the CW had moved out of the home.  
Despite Feliciano’s testimony, a fact -finder could infer that the chair 
incident played a part in the CW moving out.   Any possible relevance of 
whether Feliciano was truthful regarding what led to CW movin g out eleven 
months earlier was so tangential , however, that, in any event, it should have 
been precluded by HRE Rule 403  as discussed below . 
 
 Finally, t he ICA majority  also ruled the chair incident admissible to 
rehabilitate the CW’s character and credib ility, which Feliciano had sought 
to undermine through his testimony.   Feliciano , mem. op. at 15.   However, the 
CW’s marijuana usage and Feliciano seeing the CW sleeping next to his friend 
had been raised in the State’s direct examination of the CW.  The C W’s reason 
for moving out does not rehabilitate her character and credibility ; the CW 
did not testify as to why she had moved out.    ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
27 
 evidence “may be excluded if its probative value is 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.”  
 This court has set forth a variety of factors a trial court 
must consider when weighing probative value versus prejudicial 
effect, which include  
[(1)] the strength of the evidence as to the commission of 
the other crime, [(2)] the similarities between the crimes, 
[(3)] the interval of time that has elapsed between the 
crimes, [(4)] the need for the evidence, [(5)] the efficacy 
of alternative proof, and [(6)] the degree to which the 
evidence probably will r ouse the jury to overmastering 
hostility.  
 
Gallagher , 146 Hawaiʻi at 470, 463 P.3d at 1127.  This court 
stated that  
[w]hile these factors provide guidance as to the elements 
to consider, the court’s underlying HRE Rule 403 evaluation 
remains whether the probative value of the evidence of 
prior acts is substantially o utweighed by its potential for 
unfair prejudice.  Each factor must therefore be considered 
in light of the purpose for which the evidence was 
offered[.]  
 
Id. 
 Here, even if the chair incident evidence had any probative 
value, its probative value was substa ntially outweigh ed by its 
potential for unfair prejudice.  The jury could have inferr ed 
that Feliciano  had physically abused the CW in the past  by 
pushing her out of a chai r and acted in the same manner when he 
struck the CW in the face  in the charged offense.  “[G]iven the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
28 
 justifiable stigma attached to domestic abusers in the eyes of 
the public, evidence that [Feliciano] had committed domestic 
abuse was highly likely to ‘rouse the jury to overmastering 
hostility’ towards him.”  Lavoie, 145 Hawaiʻi at 426, 453 P.3d at 
246.   
 The potential for unfair prejudice substantially outweighed 
the probative value of the chair incident  and, therefore, the 
chair incident  evidence  should in any event have been excluded 
under HRE Rule 403 .  See Clark, 83 Hawaiʻi at 303,  926 P.2d at 
208. 
D. The family court’s limiting instructions did not mitigate 
the prejudice resulting from the erroneous admission of the 
chair incident  evidence  
 
“A jury is presumed to follow the court’s instructions.”  
State v. Webster , 94 Hawaiʻi 241, 248, 11 P.3d 466, 473 (2000).   
“However, the ability to cure potential misuse of the evidence 
with a limiting instruction presupposes that the court correctly 
instructed the jury as to the evidence’s proper use.”  
Gallagher , 146 Hawaiʻi at 475, 463 P.3d at  1132.  The family 
court’s first limiting instruction, given before the CW’s 
rebuttal testimony,  instructed the jury that  the chair incident 
evidence  could be considered only on the issue of the 
relationship of the parties .  As the ICA dissent opined, 
however, that instruction was prejudicially insufficient as it 
did not prevent the jury from, for example, concluding that the ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
29 
 couple’s relationship was an abusive one and therefore Feliciano 
was more likely to have committed the charged offense.  
Feliciano , mem. op. at 34 (Leonard, J., dissenting).  
The family court  then instructed the jury that the chair 
incident evidence could be only considered on the issue of the 
Feliciano’s motive to commit the charged offense.  “ [E]vidence 
of motive is admissible to prove  the state of mind that prompts 
a person to act in a particular way; an incentive for certain 
volitional activity .  Thus, proof of motive may be relevant in 
tending to refute or support the presumption of innocence.”   
State v. Fetelee , 117 Hawaiʻi 53, 84, 175 P.3d 709, 740 (2008)  
(cleaned up) .   
Here, the alleged “volitional activity” was the alleged 
punch.  The ICA  majority  did not specify how the chair incident 
led to Feliciano’s motivation for the alleged volitional 
activity .  The issue for the jury was whether Feliciano 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly caused physical abuse to 
CW in the early morning hours of January 14, 2017, in violation 
of HRS § 709 -906(1), not Feliciano’s underlying motivation for 
doing so.   
“It was incumbent upon the court to issue a limiting 
instruction that properly instructed the jury as to the 
legitimate uses of the prior incident[] after the court admitted 
the misconduct evidence, particularly in light of its great ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
30 
 potential for misapplication by the jury.”  Gallagher , 146 
Hawaiʻi at 476, 463 P.3d at 1133.  The family court and the ICA  
majority  therefore also erred in allowing the jury to consider 
the chair incident evidence for motive.  
D. The family court’s error  in admitting the chair incident 
evidence  was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt  
 
 Finally, we agree with Feliciano that the improper 
admission of  the chair incident evidence was not harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt.   “In applying the harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt standard, the court is requ ired to examine the 
record and determine whether there is a reasonable possibility 
that the error complained of might have contributed to the 
conviction.”  146 Hawaiʻi at 481, 463 P.3d at 1138  (cleaned up) .   
There was a reasonable possibility that the  improper 
admission of  the evidence  could have contributed to Feliciano’s 
conviction .  The critical issue at trial was whether Feliciano ’s 
act in striking the CW  in the face was abuse or in self-defense.  
As noted, this case was largely a credibility contest ; this was 
not a case “ [w]here there is a wealth of overwhelming and 
compelling evidence tending to  show the defendant guilty beyond 
a reasonable doubt[.]”  State v. T oyomura, 80 Hawaiʻi 8, 27, 904 
P.2d 893, 912 (1995).   Admission of the evidence could have 
contributed to the conviction and was therefore not harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt . ***  FOR PUBLICATION IN W EST’S HAWAIʻ I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
 
31 
 V. Conclusion  
 Based upon the reasons stated , we vacate the ICA’s  
September 28, 2020  judgment on appeal and the family court’s 
June 2, 2017 judgment, and we remand to the family court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion .   
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
for petitioner          /s/ Mark E. Recktenwald 
  /s/ Paula A. Nakayama 
  /s/ Sabrina S. McKenna 
  /s/ Michael D. Wilson 
  /s/ Todd W. Eddins 
 
  
Charles E. Murray III, 
for respondent  
 
  
  
  