 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  ***  
Electronically Filed 
Supreme Court SCWC-22-0000687 21-SEP-2026 10:11 AM Dkt. 56 OP 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ʻI 
 
 ________________________________________________________________
 ---o0o---
GERARDO DENNIS PATRICKSO
N; BENIGNO TORRES HERNANDEZ;    
FERNANDO JIMENEZ ARIAS; ALIRIO MANUEL MENDEZ; and  
CARLOS HUMBERTO RIVERA, individually and on behalf of  
others similarly situated,   
Respondents/Plaintiffs-Appellants,   
  
vs.   
  
DOW  CHEMICAL COMPANY and DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE N.A., INC.,   
Petitioners/Defendants-Appellees,   
  
and   
  
DOLE FOOD COMPANY, INC.; DOLE FRESH FRUIT COMPANY; SHELL OIL 
COMPANY; OCCIDENTAL CHEMICAL CORPORATION (individually and as 
successor to Occidental Chemical Company and Occidental Chemical 
Agricultural Products, Inc., Hooker Chemical and Plastics, 
Occidental Chemical Company of Texas, and Best Fertilizer 
Company); STANDARD FRUIT COMPANY; STANDARD FRUIT AND STEAMSHIP 
COMPANY; DEL MONTE FRESH PRODUCE ( HAWAI‘I), INC. (previously 
incorrectly named as Del Monte Fresh Produce Hawai ‘i, Inc.),   
Respondents/Defendants-Appellees.  
 ________________________________________________________________  
SCWC-22-0000687  
 
CERTIORARI TO THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
(CAAP-22-0000687; CASE NO. 1CC071000047)  
 
SEPTEMBER  21, 2026  
 
DEVENS, C.J., McKENNA, EDDINS, AND GINOZA, JJ., AND  
CIRCUIT JUDGE TOMASA, ASSIGNED BY REASON OF VACANCY    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 OPINION OF THE COURT BY McKENNA, J.  
I. Introduction 
This is the second appeal in this two-decade-old toxic tort 
case. 1 The lawsuit was brought by Central and South American 
banana plantation workers alleging injuries caused by exposure 
to the pesticide dibromochloropropane (“DBCP”) . Plaintiffs 
Gerardo Dennis Patrickson, Benigno Torres Hernandez, Alirio 
Manuel Mendez, Carlos Humberto Rivera , and Fernando Jimenez 
Arias (“Arias”)2 (collectively , the “Plaintiffs”) were previously 
employed by a subsidiary of Del Monte Fresh Produce N.A., Inc. 
(“Del Monte ”), which used DBCP manufactured by Dow Chemical 
Company ( “Dow”) in its banana plantations . 
In this appeal, t he Intermediate Court of Appeals ( “ICA”) 
made various rulings. Relevant to this certiorari proceeding, 
the ICA vacated the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ’s 
(“circuit court ”) orders granting: (1) Dow’s motion for summary 
judgment on Plaintiffs ’ complaint ; (2) Dow’s motion in limine 
excluding Plaintiffs’ expert witness, Michael J. DiBartolomeis , 
Jr. (“DiBartolomeis”); and (3) Del Monte ’s joinders in Dow’s 
motions. 
1 See Patrickson v. Dole Food Co. , 137 Hawaiʻi 217, 368 P.3d 959 (2015) 
with respect to the first appeal . 
2 Arias is referenced in the parties’ briefs as “Jimenez,” “Jimenez 
Arias,” and “Jimenez -Arias.” For consistency, we will refer to him as 
“Arias.” 
2   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 On certiorari, Dow and Del Monte (collectively , the 
“Defendants”) challenge the ICA’s vacatur of summary judgment as 
to Arias, maintain ing that the record does not reflect evidence 
of Arias’s exposure to DBCP . They further contend that 
DiBartol omeis’s expert opinions were properly excluded, 
rendering summary judgment appropriate as to Arias. Defendants 
also ask this court to determine if the ICA erroneously applied 
the wrong standard of review in vacating the circuit court’s 
order granting Dow’s motion in limine. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the ICA and 
provide guidance on remand , including how to address causation 
in mass toxic torts cases, like this one, in which many people 
allege illness or injury caused by exposure to toxic substances. 
Thirty-five years ago, in Smith v. Cutter Biological, Inc., 
a Div. of Miles Inc., 72 Haw. 416, 823 P.2d 717 (1991), this 
court recognized that the traditional “substantial factor” 
causation test is unworkable in  mass toxic tort cases:    
No longer can we apply traditional rules of 
negligence, such as those used in individual and low level 
negligence to mass tort cases, especially here, where we 
are dealing with a pharmaceutical industry that dispenses 
drugs on a wide scale that could cause massive injuries to 
the public, and where fungibility makes the strict 
requirements difficult to meet. The problem calls for adopting new rules of causation, for otherwise innocent 
plaintiffs would be left without a remedy .  
Smith, 72 Haw. at 428, 823 P.2d at 724 (emphasis added). In 
Smith, the plaintiff was unable to establish which of four 
manufacturers had caused his injury ; for that circumstance, this 
3   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
    
  
  
  
 court adopted “the alternative market share theory of recovery.”  
Smith, 72 Haw. at 421, 823 P.2d at 721.  
Here, it is undisputed that Dow manufactured the DBCP that 
Del Monte ’s subsidiary applied at the banana plantations where 
Plaintiffs were allegedly exposed. T he alternative market share 
theory of recovery is therefore inapposite . The substantial 
factor test fares no better because it may still leave 
“otherwise innocent plaintiffs [] without a remedy.” Smith, 72 
Haw. at 428, 823 P.2d at 724 . And the “ frequency, regularity, 
and proximity” test used in asbestos litigation, which 
Defendants urge this court to adopt, is merely a version of the 
substantial factor test. 
We therefore hold that the appropriate approach to 
causation in toxic  tort  cases is the one set out in comment g to 
section 26 of the Restatement  (Third)  of Torts  (“Third 
Restatement”) . See  Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. 
Harm § 26, cmt. g.   In these types of cases, the Third 
Restatement evaluates  causation based on  (1) general causation, 
(2) specific causation, and (3) exposure to the agent:  
In toxic -substances cases, the causal inquiry is modified 
by the limits of and available forms of scientific 
evidence. That inquiry often must address whether the agent 
for which the actor is responsible is capable of causing  
the disease from which another suffers (known as general 
causation). In addition, the question whether the agent 
caused the specific plaintiff’s disease (known as specific causation) is confronted. See  [Restatement (Third) of 
Torts] § 28, [cmt.] c(3) and c(4). In addition, a person’s 
exposure to the actor’s agent is another necessary aspect 
for factual cause to exist. See  [Restatement (Third) of 
4   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
    Torts] § 28, [cmt.] c(2). Each of these distinct inquiries 
is a component of the factual -cause inquiry. 
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 26, cmt. g.   
We reorder this causation test to (1) exposure to the agent, (2) 
general causation, and (3) specific causation. For if there was 
no exposure, it is not necessary to address general or specific 
causation.  
With this and the other guidance provided in this opinion, 
we affirm the ICA’s November 6, 2025 judgment on appeal. 
II. Background 
A. Factual background 
The following fact ual background is primarily derived from 
the deposition testimony of Arias and his wife, Vilma Julieta 
Graham Mastiel (“Mastiel ”). 
Shortly after getting married, Arias worked as a quality 
fruit inspector for Bandeco from 1971 to 1973 . Bandeco is a 
banana company based in Costa Rica and a subsidiary of Del 
Monte. 
Arias rotated on a weekly basis through eighteen banana 
farms, fifteen of which were owned by Bandeco, and worked up to 
seven days per week with little to no vacation days. He started 
his day by inspecting the quality of bananas arriving from the 
fields. The bananas were delivered to the patio of a packing 
facility before being taken inside, where Arias inspected them. 
5   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 Each packing facility was located on the farm where the bananas 
were grown. 
Arias worked as part of a team of two or three quality 
inspectors assigned to a single packing facility. When an 
assignment required overnight stays, they slept in a house on 
the farm. At times, Arias remained on the farm for up to a week 
due to the volume of bananas requiring inspection. 
In addition to conducting quality inspections, Arias 
occasionally accepted invitations from the farm administrator to 
walk the fields to observe operations. This occurred every once 
in a while at each farm where he worked while employed by 
Bandeco. Field cutting typically concluded around midday, after 
which Arias and the other quality inspectors entered the fields. 
While in the fields, the administrator explained the farm’s 
management and operational practices. 
Arias never observed anyone applying pesticides during his 
employment, although he knew individuals who applied them 
without knowing what substances were being used . He neither 
applied DBCP, 3 observed it being applied, nor handled it in any 
6 3  For further discussion of DBCP, see Patrickson v. Dole Food Co., 251 
F.3d 795 (9th Cir. 2001), Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468 (2003), 
Patrickson v. Dole Food Co., Inc., No. 30700, 2014 WL 895186 (App. Mar. 7, 
2014) (mem. op.), and Patrickson, 137 Hawaiʻi 217, 368 P.3d 959.    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 4 way. DBCP is a powerful nemat icide that was manufactured by Dow 
and used by Bandeco on its farms.4 
When the field cutting ran late and the arrival of bananas 
was delayed, or during periods of heavy rain , Arias and the 
other quality inspectors went into warehouses where chemicals 
used on the farms were stored and slept on or near sacks 
containing those chemicals. They were unaware of any potential 
dangers from inhalation or whether the chemicals were poi sonous. 
Although Arias could not recall the specific chemicals stored 
there, he knew they were chemicals because the warehouses were 
used to store substances applied to the banana crops. When the 
bananas arrived at the packing facility, or when it stopped 
raining, they exited the warehouses. 
Arias married Mastiel in 1968. From the time they were 
married until Mastiel’s first pregnancy in 1971, Arias and his 
wife attempted to have children, without success. During that 
Del Monte confirmed in responses to Plaintiffs’ interrogatories that, 
between 1970 and 1973, 
Bandeco  applied DBCP at its own banana farms at a rate of 4 
or 5 [cubic centimeters] per injection, 6 [to] 8 injections 
per plant, [at a depth of 15 centimeters,] using a 50 
[percent] diluted solution of DBCP. Each acre of banana 
plants had approximately [1,400 to 1,800] plants. There were two applications per year. This calculates to between 
3.6 and 7.7 gallons per year of DBCP per cultivated acre of 
banana plants on Bandeco  owned or operated farms, depending 
on the number of banana plants per acre and the number of [cubic centimeters] in each injection.  
“The DBCP was generally applied in two separate cycles lasting 
approximately two -months per cycle and was not applied monthly or more than 
two times per plant per year.” 
7   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
  
 
   
 
 period, they did not consult physicians due to financial 
constraints. Their first biological child was born in April 
1971 and passed away later that year from an illness.  
They eventually had two children: one biological daughter 
born in April 1975, and a second daughter who they adopted. 
But between 1977 and 1983, Mastiel had three additional 
pregnancies that ended in miscarriages a few months after 
conception. Mastiel never used birth control or attempted to 
avoid pregnancy. Mastiel never received an explanation from her 
physicians regarding the cause of her miscarriages or any 
treatment for her pregnancy complications. 
Arias passed away in November 2023 during the course of 
these proceedings. 
C. Procedural background 
1. Circuit court proceedings 
In their operative second amended complaint, Plaintiffs 
brought claims for negligence, conspiracy, and intentional tort 
against Dow and Del Monte, among others, and sought compensatory 
and punitive damages. Plaintiffs alleged that their health, 
welfare, and lives were damaged due to their exposure to DBCP. 
a. Michael DiBartolomeis ’s expert report and 
testimony 
  Plaintiffs’ toxicologist, DiBartolomeis, prepared an expert 
report expressing his opinion that Arias’s health problems were 
8   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 likely caused by his exposure to DBCP while working on Bandeco’s 
banana farms. Despite not knowing the precise levels of DBCP 
present in the farms, DiBartolomeis noted that “even short -term 
exposures to relatively low[ ] concentrations of DBCP in the air 
could be toxic to the male reproductive system.” DiBartolomeis 
opined that Arias’s exposure to DBCP most likely occurred via 
inhalation and potential dermal contact while working inside the 
packing facilities, walking in the open fields beneath the 
canopies of banana plants, and sleeping in the warehouse where 
chemicals were stored. DiBartolomeis also observed that Arias’s 
infertility and his wife’s miscarriages were “consistent with 
the known toxic effects of DBCP exposure in humans .” 
DiBartolomeis relied on several  human  studies that focused 
on occupational exposure  to DBCP in  agricultural settings, 
including one  by Martin Kharrazi, Gad Potashnik, and John R. 
Goldsmith  that evaluated  the pregnancy outcomes of married women 
whose husbands were employed as banana workers in Israel. 
Martin Kharrazi, Gad Potashnik, and John R. Goldsmith, 
Reproductive Effects of Dibromochloropropane, 16 Israel J. Med. 
Sci. 403, at 404 (1980) (“Kharrazi Study”). The authors 
interviewed  62 men, 56 of whom worked in direct contact with 
DBCP, and found that,  
[o]f 197 pregnancies reported for the total study group, 76 
occurred before any contact with DBCP and 121, after the 
initial exposure. Of the 76 pregnancies before DBCP 
contact, 71 resulted in livebirths and 5 (6.6% of 
9   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
  pregnancies), in spontaneous abortion; of the 121 
pregnancies after initial DBCP exposure, 97 resulted in 
livebirths and 24 (19.8% of pregnancies), in spontaneous 
abortion. 
Reproductive Effects of Dibromochloropropane, 16 Israel J. Med. 
Sci., at 404.   The authors cautioned that “[a]lthough the design 
of this type of epidemiologic study can only point to associations and cannot prove a causal relationship,  it is 
plausible that DBCP is causing an increased rate of spontaneous abortion in the exposed population through its effect on 
spermatogenesis.” Reproductive Effects of Dibromochloropropane, 
16 Israel J. Med. Sci ., at 405. Based on the Kharrazi Study and 
others, DiBartolomeis “conclude[d] within a reasonable degree of 
scientific probability that [Arias’s] exposure to DBCP . . . is 
the most plausible explanation for [his] testicular injury, 
oligospermia, and poor pregnancy outcomes.” 
b. Dow’s motion for summary judgment 
Dow moved for summary judgment on the operative complaint , 
but only as to Arias . Del Monte filed a joinder. Dow disputed 
the causation element of the negligence claim, contending 
Plaintiffs offered no evidence that Arias had any contact with 
DBCP. Dow relied on Arias’s admissions that he did not apply 
DBCP, did not work in the areas where DBCP was applied, could 
not identify a container of DBCP, and never witnessed its 
application to argue that no genuine dispute of material fact 
10   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
      
    
  
   
   
   
  
      
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  existed as to whether he was expos ed to DBCP and whether DBCP 
caused his alleged infertility and his wife’s miscarriages. 
Dow further asserted that DiBartolomeis ’s expert report and 
testimony failed to create a genuine dispute that DBCP caused 
Arias’s alleged injuries. Dow opposed DiBartolomeis’s reliance 
on the Kharrazi Study , noting that, unlike the fifty-six married 
banana workers, Arias admitted he had no direct contact with 
DBCP. Dow argued that DiBartolomeis ’s opinion rested on a study 
involving a population whose work history bore no resemblance to 
Arias’s. 
c. Dow’s motion in limine 
Dow concurrently filed a motion in limine to preclude 
DiBartolomeis’s expert report and testimony. Del Monte filed a 
joinder. Dow argued that DiBartolomeis’s opinions were 
speculative, unreliable, and unsupported by the facts because he 
improperly assumed that Arias spent four hours in the fields 
each afternoon, despite Arias’s testimony that he visited only 
“once in a while,” and that Arias was exposed to DBCP via 
inhalation on and immediately after application days, even 
though Arias admitted he never observed any a pplications. Dow 
also disputed DiBartolomeis’s opinion that DBCP was a 
“substantial factor ” in causing Mastiel’s alleged miscarriages, 
arguing that the opinion was based solely on the Kharrazi Study, 
whose authors expressly stated could not prove causation . 
11   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
  
   
    
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 d. Circuit court orders granting Dow’s motions 
Following a hearing, the circuit court granted Dow’s 
motions for summary judgment and in limine and Del Monte’s 
joinders. The circuit court concluded that Arias failed to 
establish a prima facie case of legal causation because the 
record contained no evidence of his exposure to DBCP, and that 
DiBartolomeis’s opinions thus lacked an evidentiary basis for 
causation in fact. 
3. ICA proceedings 
The ICA vacated the circuit court’s order s granting Dow’s 
motions for summary judgment and in limine . Patrickson v. Dole 
Food Co., Inc. , No. CAAP -22-0000687, 2025 WL 2693624 , at *6 
(Haw. App. Sept. 22, 2025) (mem. op.) . The ICA concluded that 
Arias’s deposition testimony raises genuine issues of material 
fact regarding his alleged exposure to DBCP and the adverse 
effects such exposure had on his and his wife’s health . Id. 
4. Certiorari proceedings 
On certiorari, Defendants raise the following questions: 
1. Toxic Tort Causation Standard . When the only evidence is 
that Plaintiff, a fruit inspector, worked away from the 
fields where the subject chemical (DBCP) was applied, never 
saw DBCP being applied, and never worked with it himself, 
is it sufficient for the plaintiff to proceed to trial when 
he merely “must have [had] some exposure because he was on 
the farm” where it was applied? 
2. Appellate Standard of Review of the Trial Court’s 
Gatekeeper Review of Expert Testimony . Did the ICA gravely 
err when it used a summary judgment standard in evaluating 
an expert’s causation testimony instead of evaluating the 
testimony for reliability and relevancy, and when it 
12   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 effectively applied a de novo review, rather than an abuse 
of discretion standard?  
Defendants essentially urge this court to adopt the 
frequency, regularity, and proximity  test applied in asbestos 
cases like  Fowler v. Akzo Nobel Chemicals, Inc., 251 N.J. 300, 
334 (N.J. 2022),  as the standard governing causation in toxic 
tort cases  and to require plaintiffs to prove  dosage  as part of 
that showing.   They also ask this court to  decide  whether the 
ICA erred in applying  the  summary judgment standard to  
DiBartolomeis’s  causation testimony  rather than  evaluating the 
testimony for reliability and relevancy  under an  abuse of 
discretion standard.  
II. Standard of Review 
A. Motion for summary judgment 
An appellate court reviews an award of summary judgment de 
novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court. 
Fujimoto v. Au, 95 Hawaiʻi 116, 136, 19 P.3d 699, 719 (2001) 
(citation omitted). This court articulated the standard as 
follows:  
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to ju dgment as a matter of law. 
Id. (citations omitted). We must review the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion for 
13   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 summary judgment. 95 Hawaiʻi at 137, 19 P.3d at 720 (citations 
omitted).  
We have further explained the burdens of the moving and 
non-moving parties on summary judgment as follows: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment 
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as 
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles 
of substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment 
as a matter of law. This b urden has two components. 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support 
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact 
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim 
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the 
motion questions; a nd (2) based on the undisputed facts, it 
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only 
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of 
production does the burden shift to the non -moving party to 
respond to the motion for summary judgment a nd demonstrate 
specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that 
present a genuine issue worthy of trial. 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of 
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving 
party and requires the moving party to convince the court 
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the 
moving part [y] is entitled to summary judgment as a matter 
of law. 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawaiʻi  462, 470, 99 P.3d 
1046,  1054  (2004)  (citation and emphasis omitted). This court 
has prescribed detailed guidance regarding how a moving party 
may satisfy its initial burden on a motion for summary judgment, 
providing that:  
a summary judgment movant may satisfy [their] initial 
burden of production by either (1) producing admissible 
evidence to show there was no genuine issue of material 
fact, or (2) showing that the non -moving party cannot carry 
[their] burden of proof at tri al.... [T]he movant generally 
cannot support its initial burden of production by pointing 
solely to the non -moving party’s lack of evidence if 
discovery has not concluded. 
14   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
       
  
   
 Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 48, 292 P.3d 1276, 1278 (2013) 
(citation omitted).  
III. Discussion 
A. Causation standard in toxic tort cases 
This court  first  addressed  the  causation  element  in toxic  
tort  cases in Smith, 72 Haw. 416, 823 P.2d 717. There, the 
appellant was a hemophiliac who tested HIV-positive with the 
AIDS virus and claimed  that his exposure to the virus occurred 
through injections of the Antihemophilic Factor Concentrate 
(AHF). Smith, 72 Haw. at 421-22, 823 P.2d at 721. Appellant 
sued the four AHF manufacturers for negligence and strict 
liability, and the manufacturers moved for summary judgment.  
Smith, 72 Haw. at 422, 823 P.2d at 722. The United States 
District Court for the District of Hawaiʻi  (“USDC-HI”)  granted 
summary judgment in favor of the manufacturers, “holding that 
appellant failed to prove specifically which manufacturer’s 
product caused his infection.” Smith, 72 Haw. at 422-23, 823 
P.2d at 722.  
The case came before this court through certified questions 
from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, 
one of which concern ed the causation factor in negligence cases: 
3. Would Hawaii allow recovery in this case when the 
identity of the actual tortfeasor cannot be proven? 
If Hawaii would allow recovery, what theory (i.e. 
burden-shifting, enterprise liability, market share 
or other) would the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court adopt?  
15   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   . . . . In considering our response to the questions, we 
note that the issue as to question[] . . . three concerns 
the causation factor in negligence. The instant problem is 
that the plaintiff cannot identify which particular 
defendant caused his injury. 
Smith, 72 Haw. at 4 19-20, 823 P.2d at 720. We responded “yes” 
to question three and adopted “the alternative market share 
theory of recovery.”5 Smith, 72 Haw. at 421, 823 P.2d at 721. 
In considering the third question, we  explained  that we 
would need to “ deviat[e]  from the traditional proof in a 
negligence case, which . . . includes the factor of causation”  
because in mass tort cases, plaintiffs might not be able to 
identify the actual entity responsible for their injuries:  
As discussed in the American Law Institute Enterprise 
Responsibility for Personal Injuries —Reporter ’s Study 
(1991) (ALI Study), the field of torts has now expanded to 
include personal injury actions described in three tiers of 
actions. . . . [T]he third tier includes “mass” torts where 
toxic exposure to many plaintiffs may, many years later, 
cause cancer or other illness. . . . It is this final tier 
with which this case deals.  It necessitates considering how 
to fairly deal with the plight of plaintiffs unable to identify, for no fault of their own, the person or entity 
who should bear the liability for their injury.   
Smith, 72 Haw. at 426, 428, 823 P.2d at 723, 724 (emphasis 
added).  
We then more generally recognized that new rules of 
causation would need to be adopted for mass tort cases: 
5The alternative market share theory of recovery is defined as follows: 
Where the conduct of two or more actors is tortious, and it 
is proved that harm has been caused to the plaintiff by 
only one of them, but there is uncertainty as to which one 
has caused it, the burden is upon each such actor to prove 
that he has not caused the harm. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 433B(3) (1965) (“Second Restatement”) . 
16    *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
   
 No longer can we apply traditional rules of 
negligence, such as those used in individual and low level 
negligence to mass tort cases, especially here, where we 
are dealing with a pharmaceutical industry that dispenses 
drugs on a wide scale that could cause massive injuries to 
the public, and where fungibility makes the strict requirements difficult to meet. The problem calls for 
adopting new rules of causation, for otherwise innocent 
plaintiffs would be left without a remedy .  
Smith, 72 Haw. at 428, 823 P.2d at 724 (emphasis added). 
Ultimately, this court adopted the alternative market share 
theory of recovery but did not set forth a new rule of 
causation . But this court explicitly recognized the need for 
new approaches to causation in toxic tort cases. 
More  recently, in Feindt  v. United States, CIV NO. 22-00397 
LEK-KJM,  2025 WL 1348465, at *2  (D. Haw. May 7, 2025) , the USDC-
HI  addressed a negligence action brought by  seventeen plaintiffs 
who sustained personal injuries “from ingesting and being 
exposed to drinking water that was contaminated by jet fuel.” 
Recognizing that we have  not developed a test for causation in 
toxic  tort  cases, the Feindt  court  predicted  how we would 
resolve the issue. First, it anticipated  that we would require 
expert testimony on the causation factor:  
There is no controlling Hawaiʻi law specifically addressing 
the test for legal causation in toxic tort cases.  The Court 
must therefore predict how the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court will 
decide the issue. See  Judd v. Weinstein, 967 F.3d 952, 955 – 
56 (9th Cir. 2020). The Court predicts that the Hawai ʻi  
Supreme Court would hold that the same test applied in 
medical negligence cases would extend to toxic tort 
actions. Namely, that expert testimony is required to determine causation.  
17   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
      
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 6 Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, at *4 (emphasis added).6 
Second, the Feindt court applied the causation test in 
Hanford, 292 F.3d at 1133, a toxic tort case involving thousands 
of plaintiffs who were allegedly exposed to radioactive 
emissions from a federal nuclear facility . In Hanford, the 
Ninth Circuit analyzed causation in terms of general and 
specific causation: 
General, or “generic” causation has been defined by courts 
to mean whether the substance at issue had the capacity to 
cause the harm alleged, while [specific causation or] 
“individual causation” refers to whether a particular 
individual suffers from a particular ailment as a result of 
exposure to a substance.  
Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, at *4. Applying this bifurcated test, 
the Feindt  court  determined there was sufficient expert 
testimony evidence to support a finding “that the chemicals 
contained in the [jet fuel] had the capacity to cause the harm 
alleged by [p]laintiffs” (general causation) and that certain 
The requirement of expert testimony is one component of the causation 
test in medical negligence cases, see Est. of Frey v. Mastroianni , 146 Hawaiʻi 
540, 550–51, 463 P.3d 1197, 1207–08 (2020), and toxic tort cases, see In re 
Hanford Nuclear Rsrv. Litig. , 292 F.3d 1124, 1133 (9th Cir. 2002) . 
In Exotics Hawaii -Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co. , this 
court stated the rationale for requiring expert testimony to prove causation 
in medical negligence cases, reasoning that “‘lay jurors are ill prepared  to 
evaluate complicated technical data for the purpose of determining whether 
professional conduct conformed to a reasonable standard of care and whether 
there is a causal relationship between the violation of a duty and an injury 
to the patient.’” Exotics, 116 Hawaiʻi  277,  299-300, 172 P.3d 1021,  1043-44 
(2007) (citation omitted); see  Craft  v. Peebles, 78 Hawaiʻi  287,  298, 893 P.2d  
138,  149  (1995) (finding it well -settled in medical malpractice cases that 
“the question of negligence must be decided by reference to relevant medical 
standards of care for which the plaintiff carries the burden of proving 
through expert medical testimony,” since  “a jury generally lacks the 
requisite special knowledge, technical training, and background to be able to 
determine the applicable standard without the assistance of an expert”).  
18   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
 
 plaintiffs sustained injuries from their “exposure to the 
chemicals contained in the [jet fuel]” (specific causation). 
Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, at *5. Moreover, upon finding “that 
the actual and specific amount of jet fuel chemicals . . . released into the water supply . . . [wa]s not capable of being 
reliably calculated,” it concluded that plaintiffs were not 
required to specify “the actual dose to which each individual . 
. . was exposed” to prove causation. Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, 
at *6.  
Finally, in addition to applying general and specific 
causation, the Feindt court also applied the substantial factor 
test that this court adopted in Mitchell v. Branch , 45 Haw. 128, 
132, 363 P.2d 969, 973 (1961) to ascertain “whether [the] 
defendant’s conduct was ‘a substantial factor in bringing about 
the [plaintiffs’] harm[s].’” Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, at *8 
(citing O’Grady v. State , 140 Hawaiʻi 36, 44, 398 P.3d 625, 633 
(2017)), *7-30. 
In Mitchell, 45 Haw. at 132, 363 P.2d at 973, we adopted 
the Restatement (First) of Torts’ (“First Restatement”) test for legal cause, which reads:  
The actor’s negligent conduct is a legal cause of harm to 
another if  
 
(a) his conduct is a substantial factor in bringing 
about the harm, and 
(b) there is no rule of law relieving the actor from 
liability because of the manner in which his 
negligence has resulted in the harm. 
19   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 Restatement (First) of Torts § 431 (1934) (emphasis added) 
(“Mitchell test”). 
However, in Smith,  this court  recognized that  toxic  tort  
cases require new rules of causation  and thus  rejected the 
substantial factor test in favor of  the alternative market share 
theory of recovery. Smith, 72 Haw. at 421, 428, 823 P.2d at 
721, 724. But although Smith  did not cite Mitchell  directly, it 
did reference Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., which 
reaffirmed the Mitchell  test as “‘[t]he best definition and the 
most workable test of proximate or legal cause.’” Knodle, 69 
Haw. 376, 390, 742 P.2d 377, 386 (1987) (citing Mitchell, 45 
Haw. at 132, 363 P.2d at 973); see  Smith, 72 Haw. at 426, 823 
P.2d at 723. Therefore, it is understandable why the Feindt  
court predicted that this court would continue to rely on the substantial factor test.  
Smith established that the substantial factor test was 
unworkable in mass toxic tort cases because it could leave 
innocent plaintiffs without a remedy. Smith, 72 Haw. at 428, 
823 P.2d at 724. In fact, the Feindt court determined that 
plaintiffs failed to meet this causation standard with respect 
to at least some of the injuries alleged. Feindt, 2025 WL 
1348465, at *8 . 
20   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
   
 And recognizing this court’s statement in Smith that mass 
toxic tort cases require new rules of causation, Defendants urge 
this court to adopt the frequency, regularity, and proximity 
test used in asbestos litigation, citing Fowler, 251 N.J. 300 , 
as an example. But as the New Jersey Supreme Court clarified in 
Fowler, 251 N.J. at 336, “[t]he frequency, regularity, and 
proximity test is merely an articulation of what constitutes a 
substantial factor for purposes of determining proximate cause 
in an occupational exposure setting.” In other words, the two 
tests are func tionally equivalent. Federal caselaw cited by 
Defendants support s this conclusion. See Menne v. Celotex 
Corp., 861 F.2d 1453, 1464 (10th Cir. 1988) ; Lohrmann v. 
Pittsburgh Corning Co rp., 782 F.2d 1156, 1162 (4th Cir. 1986) . 
It is there fore time for this court to determine how 
causation should be addressed in mass toxic tort cases. 
In this regard, t his court has turned to the Restatement of 
Torts on various occasions to determine how we should address 
developing areas of tort law. See Bynum v. Mango , 106 Hawaiʻi 
81, 86 n.12, 101 P.3d 1149, 1154 n.12 (2004) (noting this court 
has relied on the American Law Institute’s restatements of torts 
as persuasive authority); Guieb v. Guieb , 156 Hawaiʻi 162, 170 -
71, 571 P.3d 382, 390 -91 (2025) (adopting new punitive damages 
standard from Third Restatement of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 
21   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 39) Indeed, the Mitchell  test was based on the First 
Restatement  of Torts.   
We now adopt the causation test for toxic  tort  cases set 
out in comment g to section 26 of the Third Restatement. See  
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 26, cmt. g.   
In these types of cases, the Third Restatement defines causation 
in terms of  (1) general causation, (2) specific causation, and 
(3) exposure to the agent:  
In toxic -substances cases, the causal inquiry is modified 
by the limits of and available forms of scientific 
evidence. That inquiry often must address whether the agent 
for which the actor is responsible is capable of causing  
the disease from which another suffers (known as general causation). In addition, the question whether the agent 
caused the specific plaintiff’s disease (known as specific causation) is confronted. See  [Restatement (Third) of 
Torts] § 28, [cmt.] c(3) and c(4). In addition, a person’s exposure to the actor’s agent is another necessary aspect 
for factual cause to exist. See  [Restatement (Third) of 
Torts] § 28, [cmt.] c(2). Each of these distinct inquiries 
is a component of the factual -cause inquiry.  
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 26, cmt. g.   
We reorder this causation test to (1) exposure to the agent, (2) 
general causation, and (3) specific causation.   If there has 
been no exposure, there is  no need to reach general or specific 
causation.  
We also adopt the Third Restatement’s explanations of 
exposure, general causation, and specific causation:  
(2). Exposure to the agent. In evaluating factual 
causation, one issue that may arise is whether the 
plaintiff was exposed to the substance. 
 . . . . 
(3). General causation. “General causation” exists when a 
substance is capable of causing a given disease. 
22  . . . .   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 (4). Specific causation. “Specific causation” exists when 
exposure to an agent caused a particular plaintiff’s 
disease.  
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmts. 
c(2)-(4) (emphasis omitted). General and specific causation are 
generally explained by the above, which are the first sentences 
of comments (c)(3) and (4); these comments provide additional 
information on issues relating to general and specific 
causation. The first sentence of comment (c)(2) quoted above 
merely states that questions of exposure arise; the first 
paragraph of the comment generally explains how exposure might 
occur: 
(2).  Exposure  to  the  agent.  In  evaluating  factual  
causation,  one  issue  that  may  arise  is  whether  the  
plaintiff  was  exposed  to  the  substance.  Three  
primary  means  of  exposure  to  toxic  substances  
include  inhalation,  absorption,  and  ingestion,  but  
others  exist,  such  as  injection  or  a  fetus's  
transplacental  exposure  to  agents  in  the  mother's  
body.  Often  the  method  of  exposure  is  critical  to  
the  type  or  extent  of  risk.  
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. c( 2) 
(emphasis added) . 
We also note that the Third Restatement says these 
categories “are not ‘elements’ of a plaintiff’s cause of action, 
and in some cases may not require separate proof.” Restatement 
(Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. c(1) (2010). 
According to the Third Restatement, they are merely meant to 
“function as devices to organize a court’s analysis.” 
23   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
  
 
 Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. c(1) 
(2010). We agree that, in some cases, separate proof might not 
be required for all three factors of causation. But to the 
extent this comment suggests that plaintiffs need not establish 
but-for causation by a preponderance of the evidence, we 
disagree. In fact, as discussed in the following section, the 
Third Restatement actually recognizes that plaintiffs continue 
to carry the burden of establishing but -for causation by a 
preponderance of the evidence. 
B. Expert testimony is required in toxic tort cases 
To provide further guidance,  we  agree with the Feindt  
court’s prediction  that expert testimony should be required to 
establish causation in toxic  tort  cases, just as in medical 
negligence cases, given the special difficulty these cases 
present in proving a connection between a toxic substance and 
the development of a specific disease with a potentially 
significant latency period. See  Feindt, 2025 WL 1348465, at *4; 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc., 116 Hawaiʻi  at 300, 172 P.3d at 1044. 
The Third Restatement concurs. See  Reporter’s Note to 
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. c(1) 
(“Proof of causation often involves the admissibility of expert -
witness opinions.”).  
That said, Defendants ask this court to require plaintiffs 
like Arias to provide expert testimony quantifying the exposure 
24   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
     
 
 
 
 level or dosage to meet their burden of production. We decline 
to  adopt  such an approach.  
The Third Restatement explains that the burden of 
production in toxic tort cases is the same as in all civil 
negligence actions: “[t]he plaintiff must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that, but for  the defendant’s 
tortious conduct with respect to the toxic substance, the 
plaintiff would not have suffered harm.” Restatement (Third) of 
Torts § 28, cmt. c(1). Eschewing a substantial factor analysis, 
it also notes that “evidence about the causal connection between 
toxic agents and disease is [often] derived from group-based 
studies in which the incidence of disease for different groups 
is compared to determine whether there is an increased incidence 
of disease among those exposed to some dose of the [toxic] 
agent.” Reporter’s Note to Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. 
& Emot. Harm § 27, cmt. g; see  also  Restatement (Third) of 
Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt c(1).  
Some courts have embraced “the idea that a doubling of the 
incidence of disease in group studies is sufficient [and 
required] to support proof of specific causation.”7 See Bostic 
The Third Restatement cautions that epidemiologists “do not seek to 
understand causation at the individual level and do not use incidence rates 
in group studies to determine the cause of an individual’s disease.” 
Reporter’s Note to Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 2 8, 
cmt. c(4). Indeed, the authors of the Kharrazi Study included a disclaimer 
that “although the design of this type of epidemiologic study can only point 
to associations and cannot prove a causal relationship, it is possible that 
(continued . . .) 
25 7   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
  
   v. Georgia-Pac. Corp., 439 S.W.3d 332,  340, 350  (Tex. 2014)  
(requiring reliable expert testimony that plaintiff’s exposure 
“more than doubled” his risk of disease, as a less demanding 
standard would result in “industry -wide liability” and negate 
plaintiff’s burden to prove causation by a preponderance of the evidence); Allison v. McGhan Med. Corp., 184 F.3d 1300, 1315 
n.16 (11th Cir. 1999) (applying Georgia law) (breast-implant 
case; relative risk of 2.0 is the threshold for an inference of 
specific causation; relative risk of 1.24 is insufficient); but  
see  In re Joint E. & S. Dist. Asbestos Litig., 52 F.3d 1124 (2d 
Cir. 1995) (applying New York law) (holding that plaintiff could 
provide sufficient evidence of causation without proving a 
doubling in the incidence of disease); Miller v. Pfizer, Inc., 
196 F.Supp.2d 1062, 1079 (D. Kan. 2002) (rejecting a threshold 
of 2.0 for the relative risk and recognizing that even a 
relative risk greater than 2.0 may be insufficient); see  also  
Reporter’s Note to Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. 
Harm § 28, cmt. c(4) (collecting cases either accepting or 
rejecting the doubling of risk requirement).  
Some courts require plaintiffs who cannot submit direct 
proof of specific causation to rule out other possible causes of 
 (. . . continued) 
DBCP is causing an increased rate of spontaneous abortion in the exposed 
population through its effect on spermatogenesis.” Reproductive Effects of 
Dibromochloropropane , 16 Israel J. Med. Sci ., at 405. 
26   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
 their disease to increase the probability that the toxic agent 
at issue was responsible (also known as differential diagnosis). 
See Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. 
c(4) (collecting cases). 
Other cases indicate that circumstantial evidence may be 
independently sufficient to establish specific causation where 
there is no direct proof or group -based studies. See Norris v. 
Baxter Healthcare Corp. , 397 F.3d 878, 882 -883 (10th Cir. 2005) 
(applying Colorado law) (acknowledging that epidemiology is not 
required to prove causation but that when a substantial body of 
exonerative epidemiologic evidence exists, it cannot be ignored, 
and other evidence proffered to prove causation); Rider v. 
Sandoz Pharms. Corp. , 295 F.3d 1194, 1198 (11th Cir. 2002) 
(applying Georgia law) (“It is well -settled that while 
epidemiological studies may be powerful evidence of causation, 
the lack thereof is not fatal to a plaintiff’s case.”) 
We decline to adopt any rigid test and instead hold that a 
plaintiff should offer some evidence “that he or she was exposed 
to the toxin at issue, including the estimated amount and 
duration of exposure.” Lowery v. Enbridge Energy Ltd. P’ship, 
500 Mich. 1034, 898 N.W.2d 906, 914–15 (Mich. 2017) 
(concurrence, Markman, C.J.). Such circumstantial proof must 
facilitate reasonable inferences of causation, not mere 
speculation. See  Restatement (Third) of Torts: Phys. & Emot. 
27   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 Harm § 28, cmt. b (“[A]ll causal determinations require 
inferential reasoning.”). As we are unable to anticipate 
factual circumstances of future cases, w e refuse to set hard and 
fast rules regarding the level of exposure required. But trial 
courts should exercise their gatekeeping function to ascertain 
whether proposed expert testimony meets the touchstones of 
relevance and reliability. State v. Vliet , 95 Hawaiʻi 94, 106, 
19 P.3d 42, 54 (2001). 
C. DiBartolomeis’s expert report and testimony is admissible 
under State v. Kim 
Turning to t he admissibility of DiBartolomeis’s expert 
testimony, Defendants argue that the ICA improperly applied a de 
novo summary judgment standard rather than the requisite abuse 
of discretion standard. 
The circuit court excluded DiBartolomeis ’s expert report 
and testimony , saying: 
His opinions are not based on any evidence of 
causation in fact. And causation in fact is predicate evidence that Dr. Di Bartolomeis cannot 
provide. That has to be provided through witnesses 
in the case, and there is simply no evidence that 
Mr. Arias was exposed.  
The circuit court was requiring a certain level of exposure 
when it so ruled. But we conclude that DiBartolomeis’s expert 
testimony met the touchstone of relevance and reliability, and 
that the ICA correctly held that the circuit court abused its 
discretion by excluding that evidence . 
28   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 Here, the issue is not whether DiBartolomeis relied on a 
novel methodology for which we must determine its general 
acceptance. Rather, the issue is whether DiBartolomeis based 
his opinions upon a sound factual foundation. In preparing his 
expert report, DiBartolomeis relied, in part, on Arias’ s  
deposition testimony and the Kharrazi Study to reach his 
conclusion that, to “a reasonable degree of scientific 
probability,” Arias’ s  exposure to DBCP was “a substantial factor 
in causing” his infertility and his wife’s miscarriages. Because Arias’ s  deposition testimony and the Kharrazi Study do 
provide circumstantial proof to facilitate a reasonable In State v. Kim , 64 Haw. 598, 604 -05, 645 P.2d 1330, 1336 
(1982), this court set out the rule governing the admissibility 
of expert testimony: 
The critical inquiry with respect to expert testimony 
. . . is whether such testimony ‘will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or determine 
a fact in issue . . . . ” [HRE 702.] Generally, in 
order to so assist the jury an expert must base his testimony upon a sound factual foundation; any 
inferences or opinions must be the product of an explicable and reliable system of analysis; and such 
opinions must add to the common understanding of the 
jury. See  [HRE 703.]  
[(Footnotes and citations omitted).] “Therefore, the 
reliability prong of Kim  could include the Frye  test, but 
Kim  is not necessarily limited to general acceptance in the 
scientific community. Under the reliability prong of Kim, it is possible that a court could also consider the 
scientific procedure itself, as well as other evidence of 
the procedure’s reliability.”  
See State v. Montalbo , 73 Haw. 130, 138, 828 P.2d 1274, 1280 
(1992) (affirming the Kim test). 
29   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 inference as to exposure and specific causation, both pieces of 
evidence provide a reliable factual foundation for 
DiBartolomeis’s expert opinion.  
In addition, in summary judgment, we review the record de 
novo to ascertain whether there were genuine issues of material 
fact. See Fujimoto , 95 Hawaiʻi at 136, 19 P.3d at 719. 
DiBartolomeis’s expert report notes that inhalation and 
potential dermal contact with DBCP likely caused the infertility 
issues alleged here. There was also ample evidence of 
inhalation and potential dermal contact that the jury could 
consider. Therefore, the circuit court exceeded its discretion 
in refusing DiBartolomeis’s testimony. 
D. Arias raises genuine disputes of material fact as to 
whether he was exposed to DBCP and whether such exposure 
adversely affected his health 
In the proceedings below, Plaintiffs’ counsel did address 
causation in terms of general and specific causation, stating at 
the summary judgment and in limine hearing that the disputed 
issue was specific causation, not general causation (“I don’t 
think there’s any dispute that generally speaking on a general 
causation level DBCP is capable of causing this kind of harm. 
So we’re not arguing about general causation. We’re arguing 
about specific causation.”) . Dow did not refute Plaintiffs’ 
counsel’s terminology and used similar language in its cert 
application (“In establishing specific causation, which is 
30   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
             
        
  
    whether the plaintiff was exposed to the toxic substance at a 
level sufficient to cause the complained -of medical condition, 
these courts require proof of dose.” (Citation omitted)) . 
In its oral and written rulings, the circuit court focused 
on whether Arias established a prima facie case of legal 
causation and determined “there [wa]s no substantial evidence of 
[Dow’s] negligence causing harm to [Arias].” It appears to have 
determined any exposure was not a “substantial factor.” 
The parties agree that the remaining issues in dispute are 
exposure and specific causation: that is, whether Arias was 
exposed to DBCP and whether such exposure caused his infertility 
and his wife’s miscarriages. Arias must have presented reliable 
expert testimony, grounded in scientific literature, to 
establish specific causation by a preponderance of the evidence. 
But we have ruled in the past that, 
[w]hen causation of the injury is a medical issue, as it is 
here, ‘[the] matter does not turn on the use of a 
particular form of words by the physicians in giving their 
testimony,’ since it is for the trier of facts, not the 
medical witnesses, to make a legal determination of the question of causation. Hence, the failure of a medical 
witness to testify positively as to what was the cause of 
the injury, or his statement that the accident ‘might’ be 
or ‘probably’ was the cause of the injury, is merely a 
circumstance to be taken into consideration by the trier of 
facts.  
Dzurik v. Tamura, 44 Haw. 327, 330, 359 P.2d 164, 165-66 (1960). 
We hold that Dzurik applies to expert testimony in toxic tort 
cases as well. No “particular form of words” regarding 
causation is required. Id. An expert’s statement that a toxic 
31   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
 substance “ ‘might’ be or ‘probably’ was the cause of the injury, 
is merely a circumstance to be taken into consideration by the 
trier of facts” to determine whether causation has been 
established. Id. 
Reviewing the evidence presented at summary judgment, 
Plaintiffs offered sufficient evidence of exposure and adequate 
expert testimony on specific causation to overcome summary 
judgment and proceed to trial. 
During his deposition, Arias testified that he rotated 
through eighteen farms, worked up to seven days a week over a 
three-year period, took little to no vacation days, and often 
accompanied the administrator into the fields to discuss farm 
operations and management, where Plaintiffs argued he 
potentially inhaled toxic fumes of DBCP. He also slept in 
warehouses , where circumstantial evidence indicates DBCP was 
stored. Equally significant are Del Monte’s admissions that 
Bandeco injected a “50 [percent] diluted solution of DBCP” into 
each plant, covering approximately 1,400 to 1,800 banana plants 
per acre during two application cycles, each lasting two months. 
The evidence therefore also indicates possible dermal exposure 
and contact. 
Because this appeal concerns a motion for summary judgment, 
where all evidence must be construed and all reasonable 
inferences drawn in favor of the non -moving party, Arias’ s 
32   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
  deposition testimony and Del Monte’s admissions present enough 
circumstantial evidence to raise a genuine dispute  that Arias 
was exposed to DBCP. A juror could reasonably infer that, since Arias worked up to seven days a week with  little to no  vacation 
days, it is more likely than not that he was present in the fields when DBCP was applied during the four-month period and 
inhaled the toxic fumes. See  French, 105 
Hawaiʻi at 466, 99 P.3d 
at 1050; Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai ʻi 
490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004). In addition, as noted above, 
DiBartolomeis’s expert report mentions  that dermatological or 
skin exposure causes the infertility issues alleged here.  
As for specific causation, Plaintiffs’ counsel explained at 
the summary judgment and in limine hearing that DiBartolomeis 
would not offer “an ultimate finding of fact” on specific 
causation. Instead, Plaintiffs’ counsel stated DiBartolomeis 
would testify that, if Arias was exposed “to DBCP at excessive 
levels” while in the fields, such exposure would “increase the 
risk of injury and be sufficient to cause the kind[s] of 
injur[ries]” Arias sustained, wit hout testifying that it 
actually caused them. 
In preparing his expert report, DiBartolomeis relied,  in 
part,  on the Kharrazi Study. While acknowledging that the 
Kharrazi Study was not “particularly robust,” DiBartolomeis 
stated the presence of “a strongly significant correlation 
33   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 between paternal DBCP exposure and spontaneous abortion in a 
small group of agricultural workers exposed for relatively short 
time periods is important evidence that the toxic effects of 
DBCP on the male reproductive system can be transferred to 
conception and the viability of the fetus.” 
What is significant about the Kharrazi Study is its finding 
that the husbands’ exposure to DBCP more than doubled the risk 
of spontaneous abortions among their  wives  (6.6 percent pre-DBCP 
exposure versus 25.6 percent post-DBCP exposure). See  
Reproductive Effects of Dibromochloropropane, 16 Israel J. Med. 
Sci., at 404; Bostic, 439 S.W.3d at 349 –50; Restatement (Third) 
of Torts: Phys. & Emot. Harm § 28, cmt. c(4).  
While we decline to adopt a categorical rule requiring 
plaintiffs in toxic tort cases to present group -based studies 
demonstrating a doubling of the risk attributable to toxic 
exposure in the absence of direct proof of specific causation, 
in this case, both the Kharrazi Study and Arias’s deposition 
testimony provided a sufficient factual and scientific basis to 
support DiBartolomeis’s expert op inion to survive summary 
judgment. Both pieces of evidence would aid the jury to 
understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue, that is, 
whether Arias’ exposure to DBCP more likely than not caused his 
infertility and his wife’s miscarriages, such that there was 
34   *** FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER *** 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
      
 
 specific causation.  Finally, pursuant to Dzurik, no particular 
form  of words is required for causation.   
IV. Conclusion 
For all of these reasons, w e affirm the ICA’s November 6, 
2025 judgment on appeal and remand to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
David W.H. Chee    
for  petitioner  
Del Monte  Fresh Produce 
N.A., Inc.      
      
Steven L. Goto,  
Michael L. Brem, and     
George R. Diaz-Arrastia    
for respondent         
Dow Chemical  Company    
Keith M. Kiuchi and    
Scott M. Hendler   
for respondent  
Plaintiffs-Appellants  /s/ Vladimir P. Devens  
/s/ Sabrina S. McKenna  
/s/ Todd W. Eddins   
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza  
    /s/ Taryn R. Tomasa  
35 